23. The provider must ensure that both the learner and the programme are eligible for funding by conducting an initial assessment. We do not specify which assessment tools must be used; this is for the provider to determine. The initial assessment must include an assessment of:

23.1. Learner eligibility (see paragraphs 25 to 29);

23.2. Programme eligibility, after accounting for all relevant prior learning and experience (see paragraphs 30 to 35);

23.3. Learning support (see paragraphs 36 to 42); and

23.4. English and maths support (see paragraphs 43 to 58).

24. The provider must also discuss the areas listed in paragraphs 60 to 62 before accessing apprenticeship funding. The discussion in relation to the care leavers’ bursary is only with the apprentice (see paragraph 108), the remaining areas are for discussion with the employer.

Learner eligibility

New for 1 August 2025

29.3 Clarification: Shareholder / directors can also be called ‘persons of significant control’, so we have added this terminology.

New for 1 January 2026 – Version 3

28 and 29.8 Policy update: We have updated the rules to reflect that from

1 January 2026, Level 7 apprenticeships will only be government-funded for apprentices who, at the start of their apprenticeship training, are either under the age of 22, or aged under 25 and have an Education, Health and Care (EHC) plan and/or have been, or are, in the care of their local authority.

Any individual who started a level 7 apprenticeship before 1 January

2026 will continue to be funded through to completion.

You can find more information on privately funded apprenticeships on GOV.UK.

Individuals who are eligible for funding

25. The provider must check the eligibility of the individual for apprenticeship funding at the start of their apprenticeship.

25.1. A provider must only claim funding for an individual who meets the residency eligibility criteria set out in Annex A of this document.

25.2. We will use the age of the apprentice on the day they start their apprenticeship training (the learning start date within the ILR) for all age-based eligibility criteria for that apprenticeship.

25.3. An apprentice’s eligibility for funding will not change during the apprenticeship unless their employment status also changes (e.g. they become unemployed). If an apprentice is made redundant, we may continue to fund their training, even if they cannot find another employer (see paragraphs 279 to 283).

25.4. A provider must reassess an individual’s eligibility for any new apprenticeship.

26. To access funds in the employer’s apprenticeship service account or government-employer co-investment, the provider must ensure that the individual:

26.1. Starts their apprenticeship after the last Friday in June of the school academic year (September to August) in which they have their 16th birthday.

26.2. Is able to complete the apprenticeship within the time they have available, including the end-point assessment. If the provider knows an individual is unable to complete the apprenticeship in the time they have available, (e.g. because their visa will expire or because they have a fixed term contract which is shorter than the duration of the apprenticeship), they must not be funded.

26.3. Does not use a student loan to pay for their apprenticeship. Where an individual transfers to an apprenticeship from a full-time further education or higher education course, and that course has been funded by a student loan, the loan must be terminated by the individual and the provider must be satisfied that this has occurred.

26.4. Does not benefit from funding for any part of their apprenticeship that duplicates training or assessment that they have received from any other source.

26.5. Spends at least 50% of their working hours in England over the duration of the apprenticeship. This also applies to remote and hybrid workers.

26.5.1 For working hours to be counted in the 50% limit, they must be regular, planned and known at the start of the apprenticeship. See Annex A (paragraph 338) for exceptions to this rule.

26.5.2 The provider must make separate arrangements with the relevant devolved administration for those who do not meet this rule.

27. An employer must only use funds from their apprenticeship service account or government-employer co-investment for apprentices employed by them or a connected company or charity as defined by HMRC. This also applies where the apprentice is funded by a transfer of funds from another employer.

27.1. As an exception to paragraph 27, employers who operate Pooled PAYE schemes may use funds from their apprenticeship service account or government-employer co-investment for apprentices employed by an organisation within their Pooled PAYE scheme.

28. From 1 January 2026, apprentices starting a Level 7 apprenticeship standard will only be eligible for funding if, at the start of the apprenticeship training, they are:

28.1. Aged between 16 and 21 years old (or 15 years of age if the apprentice’s 16th birthday is between the last Friday of June and 31 August); or

28.2. Aged between 22 and 24 years old and have either an Education, Health and Care (EHC) plan provided by their local authority and /or have been, or are, in the care of their local authority as defined in paragraph 108.2.

Individuals who are not eligible for funding

29. A provider must not claim funding for individuals who:

29.1. Are self-employed as a sole trader;

29.2. Are working under IR35 (see glossary definition) unless they meet one of the alternative English apprenticeship arrangements (see paragraphs 69 to 70);

29.3. Are a shareholder, director or person of significant control, with no separate identifiable line manager to undertake the role of ‘employer’ as defined by these funding rules;

29.3.1 During the apprenticeship, if an apprentice becomes self-employed as a sole trader, or becomes a shareholder, director or person of significant control, with no separate identifiable line manager, they will no longer be eligible for

funding and the provider must report them as having withdrawn.

29.4. Are undertaking another apprenticeship;

29.5. Are undertaking training funded through the Adult Skills Fund (ASF), where that training will:

29.5.1 Replicate vocational and other learning aims covered by the apprenticeship, including English and /or maths;

29.5.2 Offer career related training that conflicts with the apprenticeship aims; or

29.5.3 Take place during working hours. Where an apprentice has more than one job, working hours refers to the hours of the job the apprenticeship is linked to.

29.5.4 As an exception to paragraph 29.5 an individual may commence an apprenticeship and attract funding where they have less than four weeks to completion of an existing DfE funded course.

29.6. Are in receipt of any other direct/indirect DfE funding during their apprenticeship; this includes any other DfE funded FE / HE programme, including those funded by the Office for Students or a student loan, but excludes funding outlined in paragraph 29.5 and apprentices taking part in the Turing Scheme; or

29.7. Are undertaking any part of an apprenticeship whilst on a sandwich placement as part of a degree.

29.8. From 1 January 2026, are starting a Level 7 apprenticeship standard subject to the exceptions detailed in paragraph 28.

29.8.1 You can find more information on privately funded apprenticeships on GOV.UK.

Evidence requirements The provider must retain evidence of an individual’s eligibility, including:

• Confirmation that they have seen the learner’s identity documents or immigration permission to verify residency eligibility in line with Annex A.

• Confirmation that the learner is eligible for funding.

• Confirmation of the apprentice’s date of birth.

• Evidence that the apprentice will spend at least 50% of their working hours in England over the duration of the apprenticeship. Where the business footprint is larger than England this could include a roster for a typical month for the apprentice along with written confirmation from the employer.

• Evidence to confirm that the apprentice is employed by that employer, or a connected company or charity and this employment covers the full period of the apprenticeship, including the end-point assessment. This can be a relevant extract from a contract of employment or a signed declaration by the employer. Confirmation that the apprentice is not enrolled on any other programme as detailed in paragraphs 29.4 to 29.7. The provider must confirm the type of evidence they have seen to satisfy that the apprentice meets all eligibility criteria. Where this evidence needs to come from the apprentice’s employer, the employer must give this to the provider.

Recognition of prior learning and experience

Overview

30. To verify an apprentice’s suitability for their chosen standard and to tailor the learner’s training plan, the provider must review the individual’s prior learning and experience. Funds must not be used to pay for training for knowledge, skills and behaviours already attained by the apprentice, and we will take action to recover apprenticeship funding where this happens.

30.1. Prior learning and experience includes the following:

30.1.1 Prior education, training, or associated qualifications in a related subject sector area, including any previous apprenticeship undertaken; and

30.1.2 Learning or competence gained from prior work experience, particularly where the apprentice is an existing employee, or is beginning their apprenticeship after completing another programme with a relevant work placement.

30.2. Further information about recognition of prior learning can be found on GOV.UK.

Assessment of prior learning and experience (16–18-year-olds)

31. Prior learning is unlikely to exist for apprentices aged 16-18 unless they have:

New for 1 August 2025

35 Clarification: Text updated to align with the changes in the off-the-job training policy (i.e. the prior learning reduction now references the published hours for the minimum volume of off-the-job training delivery and recognises that the link between off-the-job training and duration has been removed).

New for 15 July 2025 – Version 2

35.2 Clarification: There is no change to the RPL policy so we have made it clearer that the provider should continue to use their own planned hours as the starting point for the RPL calculation (provided their planned hours are equal to or more than the published OTJT minimum requirement for the standard).

31.1. Previously enrolled in an apprenticeship; or other training that is aligned to Skills England’s occupational standards in the same sector (see paragraphs 33.3 to 33.4); or

31.2. They have relevant prior work experience (see paragraph 30.1.2).

32. To establish this, the provider must check the individual’s personal learning record, if they have one, and have a discussion with the learner about the likelihood of relevant prior learning against the proposed apprenticeship standard.

32.1. Where relevant prior learning and experience is not identified, this should be documented and agreed with the employer. No further actions are required, including any price reduction.

32.2. If relevant prior learning and experience does exist, then the provider must follow the rules in paragraphs 33.2 to 33.4 below.

Assessment of prior learning and experience (19+ year-olds)

33. For all apprentices aged 19+ the provider must:

33.1. Check the individual’s personal learning record, if they have one, and have a discussion with the learner about the likelihood of relevant prior learning against the proposed apprenticeship standard;

33.2. Conduct a skills scan against the knowledge, skills and behaviours of the proposed apprenticeship standard;

33.2.1 If considered relevant by the provider, or required by the standard, this skills scan can be supplemented with additional diagnostic testing, of either occupational competence or of English and maths prior attainment.

33.3. Take account of the published progression profiles, if the individual has completed a T-Level. These will identify if a subsequent apprenticeship in the same occupational area can be funded, and if so, whether that apprenticeship must be an ‘accelerated apprenticeship’ (see glossary) with an adjustment in content and price.

33.4. Take account of progression profiles, where published and relevant, if the individual has taken part in a skills bootcamp.

34. Where relevant prior learning and experience is not identified, this should be documented and agreed with the employer.

Taking account of prior learning and experience (all learners)

35. Where relevant prior learning and experience is identified, the provider must summarise the impact, including whether, and by how much, the apprenticeship content and price has been reduced.

35.1. Where content is to be omitted from the training plan, this must be shown as a volume of off-the-job training hours. This reduction in hours must translate to a reduction in price.

35.1.1 If there is insufficient content remaining (i.e. less than 8 months or 187 hours), the individual will be ineligible for apprenticeship funding.

35.1.2 Some standards linked to regulated professions (e.g. the nursing associate standard) require that prior learning, including experience in the workplace, is formally accredited.

Where training needs to be repeated to meet the accreditation requirements of a regulated profession then this is eligible learning; this must be documented as part of the assessment. The relevant industry / professional body can provide further advice.

35.2. To calculate the reduction in price the provider must:

35.2.1 Calculate the percentage of prior learning that the individual has, as a percentage of the off-the-job training hours that would be delivered to an individual with no relevant prior learning for the same standard. Providers must use their own planned hours which must be at least (but can be higher than) the volume of off-the-job training hours published on the standard (or in Annex C) as the starting point for the calculation (see paragraph 80). For example, if the individual’s prior learning accounts for

300 off-the-job training hours and typically, for the same standard, the provider would usually plan to deliver 1,000 hours to an individual with no prior learning, this would equate to a 30% prior learning percentage. Further examples can be found in the RPL guidance (see paragraph 30.2).

35.2.2 Reduce the total price by at least 50% of the prior learning percentage, from the funding band maximum (the 50% reduction recognises that there are some fixed costs in the apprenticeship).

For the example in the paragraph above, where the apprentice has 30% prior learning, this means there must be a reduction in the total price of at least 15% from the funding band maximum (e.g. £1,500 price reduction if the funding band maximum is £10,000). This reduced price (i.e. £8,500) is the maximum that will be paid using apprenticeship funding (i.e. £8,500 for a £10,000 funding band where there has been a 15% price reduction).

35.2.3 This new maximum funding amount (i.e. £8,500) becomes the starting point for any further price negotiation with the employer. Additional discounts could be applied, for example, where the apprentice is part of a large cohort.

35.2.4 The final price (i.e. £8,500, if there is no further employer discount in the example above) must be split between fields TNP1 and TNP2 in the ILR. TNP1 is the price of the training and on-programme assessment, TNP2 is the price agreed for the end-point assessment (see paragraphs 114 to 129).

Evidence requirements For all learners the provider has:

• Had a discussion with the learner about the likelihood of relevant prior learning against the proposed apprenticeship standard.

• Checked the individual’s personal learning record. Where this information is unavailable, or an apprentice is unable to provide evidence of prior attainment please refer to get a replacement exam certificate on GOV.UK. Evidence of proof of equivalency from UK ENIC can be used where an individual has an international qualification. For learners aged 19+ (and 16–18-year-old learners if appropriate) the provider has also:

• Conducted a skills scan against the knowledge, skills and behaviours of the proposed apprenticeship standard and where relevant, has supplemented this with additional diagnostic testing.

• Where relevant, has used the published progression profiles. Where relevant prior learning and experience does not exist, the provider has recorded this and the reason for this assessment. This has been agreed with the employer. Where relevant prior learning and experience does exist, this has been agreed with the employer and the provider has:

• Summarised the impact, including whether, and by how much, the apprenticeship content and price has been reduced. This summary confirms that the resulting apprenticeship meets the funding rules in relation to the minimum duration and off-the-job training.

͂ Where content is to be omitted from the training plan, this has been shown as a volume of off-the-job training hours.

͂ Where the standard is linked to a regulated profession, and this impacts the reduction, this has been documented.

• Calculated the reduction in price by following the example set out in paragraph

35.2 and has split the outcome over fields TNP1 and TNP2 in the ILR.

Apprentices who need access to learning support

Definitions

36. Learning support funding is available to meet the costs (incurred by a provider) of putting in place reasonable adjustments, as set out in section 20 of the Equality Act 2010. This is for an apprentice who:

36.1. Has a learning difficulty or disability as defined in Section 15ZA(6) of the Education Act 1996 (as amended by section 41 of the Apprenticeships, Skills, Children and Learning Act 2009), who, as a result of this learning difficulty or disability, requires reasonable adjustments in order to be able to complete their apprenticeship, including any reasonable adjustments to complete English and /or maths requirements (this includes where apprentices have opted-in – see paragraph 46) and end-point assessment.

37. For the purposes of this section, and as defined in Section 15ZA(6) of the Education Act 1996, a person has a learning difficulty (or disability) if (a) the person has a significantly greater difficulty in learning than the majority of persons of the same age, or (b) the person has a disability which either prevents or hinders the person from making use of facilities of a kind generally provided by institutions providing education or training for persons who are over compulsory school age.

38. In relation to paragraphs 36 to 37, this can include an apprentice who has not previously had a learning difficulty or disability identified, but in relation to whom the provider has identified a learning difficulty or disability (as defined in Section 15ZA(6) of the Education Act 1996) that would directly affect the apprentice’s ability to complete their apprenticeship. Assessment for learning support funding

39. As part of the initial assessment, the provider must undertake a screening exercise for learning support.

39.1. Where this assessment identifies potential learning difficulties or disabilities, and before a claim for learning support funding can be made, the provider may need to undertake a further detailed assessment to

New for 1 August 2025

36.1 Clarification: Confirmation that where we refer to English and /or maths requirements that this also includes learners aged 19+ who have opted in to this learning.

identify whether an apprentice has a learning difficulty or disability that directly impacts their ability to complete the apprenticeship on which they are enrolled.

39.1.1 This further detailed assessment is not eligible for funding.

39.1.2 A detailed assessment can take place at any point during the apprenticeship (see paragraph 98.5). However, claims for learning support can only be made from the date that evidence is acquired.

39.1.3 The provider must refer to the evidence requirements below to ensure they meet the requirements for claiming.

39.1.4 More information on how to assess the needs of the individual and collect evidence can be found within this guidance on GOV.UK.

39.2. A learning difficulty or disability that does not require reasonable adjustments or cannot be evidenced as directly impacting on the apprentice’s ability to complete their apprenticeship will not be eligible for learning support funding. Learning support is not available:

39.2.1 To deal with everyday difficulties, which includes the definition as per Section 15ZA(7) of the Education Act 1996, that are not directly associated with the apprenticeship. If an apprentice needs help at work, they may be able to get help from Access to Work;

39.2.2 To address any learning gaps in an apprentice’s prior knowledge, skills, or behaviours where these are relevant to their apprenticeship, but where there is no identified learning difficulty or disability in respect of obtaining this learning (see paragraphs 36 to 37); or

39.2.3 Where there are no costs incurred in putting in place reasonable adjustments. Claiming learning support funding

40. The provider can only claim learning support funding for each month in which reasonable adjustments are provided to the apprentice and where evidence of costs can be provided. For months in which no reasonable adjustments are necessary, or no costs have been incurred, a claim for learning support funding must not be made.

40.1. Learning support funding is fixed at a monthly rate of £150.

40.2. This will be paid, to the provider, in the months in which reasonable adjustments are necessary and delivered, where they are evidenced and where this has been reported in the ILR.

40.2.1 Learning support funding is not deducted from the employer’s apprenticeship service account, nor does it require employer co-investment.

40.3. If the cost exceeds £150 per month, but is less than £19,000 per annum, the provider can claim the additional costs via the earnings adjustment statement (EAS). Further information on the EAS can be found on GOV.UK.

40.3.1 Where one-off costs exceed £150 in a given month, the additional amount should be claimed via EAS (alongside the monthly fixed amount).

40.4. The monthly payment cannot be used to pay for the further detailed assessment, as this is not eligible for funding (see paragraph 39.1.1).

40.5. Ongoing delivery and the need for learning support must be reviewed at least every 3 calendar months.

40.5.1 Where the review determines that learning support funding is no longer needed, providers must immediately stop claiming these payments from the date learning support ceased by updating the ILR as appropriate.

40.5.2 Where an apprentice has given consent for their employer to be aware of their learning support requirements this review can be part of the progress review discussions.

41. The provider must promptly claim for learning support funding through the ILR and the EAS. We will not pay for claims from a previous funding year if claims are not made on time. The deadline for claiming is the last ILR collection for each funding year.

Apprentices who need access to exceptional learning support (ELS)

42. An apprentice who requires substantial reasonable adjustments to start or continue learning can get access to exceptional learning support if the cost of these reasonable adjustments exceeds £19,000 in a funding year. The provider must submit ELS claims to us at the beginning of the apprenticeship, or when it is identified that the apprentice requires support costing more than £19,000 in the funding year.

42.1. The provider must complete and send the ELS claim form to us so that we can authorise the request. The exceptional learning support cost form can be accessed on GOV.UK.

Evidence requirements

• Where the provider has identified a learning difficulty or disability, they must (1) evidence that an assessment has been carried out and hold a copy of the assessment results which identifies the apprentice’s learning difficulty or disability; (2) evidence details of the reasonable adjustments that are necessary to enable the apprentice to complete the apprenticeship on which they are enrolled; and (3) include a description of how progress towards the completion of the apprenticeship would be directly impacted if the reasonable adjustments listed were not put in place for the apprentice.

• The provider has documented evidence of how they plan to deliver the necessary reasonable adjustments throughout the apprenticeship. This plan has been agreed and signed-off by the apprentice, prior to a claim for learning support funding being made and, where the apprentice has given consent, this information has been shared with their employer.

• For the months where learning support funding is claimed, the provider has evidence and documented details of the necessary reasonable adjustments that have been delivered in that period. Learning support funding will only be paid in months where the reasonable adjustments are required and are being delivered. Where costs exceed £150 per month the provider must provide invoices to evidence the actual costs incurred (claimed via the Earnings Adjustment Statement).

• The provider has documented evidence of reviews being undertaken, at least every

3 calendar months, throughout the apprenticeship to ensure that reasonable adjustments are still necessary and appropriate (for the apprenticeship). This evidence confirms the effectiveness of the reasonable adjustments and how these have been adapted where necessary – evidence should also confirm the month(s), where claims have been made, are accurate. Where amendments to the original plan are required, these will need to be documented, signed-off by the apprentice and evidenced accordingly.

• Where exceptional learning support (ELS) is claimed for an apprentice, the provider has the application and supporting evidence for this claim. This includes details of the reasonable adjustments and the actual costs incurred.

Support for English and maths training

Overview

43. As part of the initial assessment, for all apprentices irrespective of age, the provider must discuss with the employer and apprentice, whether the

New for 1 August 2025

43 Clarification: We have clarified that providers must use the initial assessment to determine whether apprentices aged 19+ will be studying English and /or maths during the programme.

43.2 Clarification: We have clarified that the employer holds overall responsibility for the decision to opt-in their 19+ apprentices to study a standalone English and /or maths qualification.

43.2.1 Clarification: We have clarified the difference between a standalone English and /or maths qualification and where it may be a mandatory requirement of the standard.

44.1 Clarification: We have clarified that for 19+ apprentices who are not studying English and /or maths, they are not required to undertake the diagnostic assessment portion of the initial assessment, nor provide evidence of prior attainment.

45.2 / 46.2 Policy update: We have introduced the requirement for providers to ensure that apprentices who are studying English and /or maths must carry out active learning in line with the signed training plan. This is separate to OTJT active learning, as stipulated in the glossary definition. Providers must comply with both active learning rules separately where English and /or maths funding is being accessed.

53 Clarification: We have clarified that providers must not use ASF or any other DfE funded programmes, whilst claiming from the apprenticeship budget.

New for 1 January 2026 – Version 3

44.1 Clarification: We have clarified that if the apprentice, at any age, already holds evidence of a suitable equivalent qualification or, where the apprentice is aged 19+ and their employer does not agree for a standalone English and /or maths qualification to be included as part of the programme, there is no mandatory requirement for the provider to carry out any form of assessment as part of the initial assessment.

apprentice will study towards a standalone English and /or maths qualification as part of their apprenticeship.

43.1. If the apprentice is 16-18 when they begin their apprenticeship training, and they do not already hold a suitable equivalent qualification (see paragraph 43.3), English and /or maths is a mandatory part of the programme. We will fund the apprentice to achieve up to an approved level 2 qualification in English and /or maths.

43.2. If the apprentice is 19+ when they begin their apprenticeship training, and they do not already hold a suitable equivalent qualification (see paragraph 43.3), English and /or maths is an optional part of the programme. We will fund the apprentice to study towards up to an approved level 2 qualification in English and /or maths, if their employer agrees for them to complete it as part of the programme. Providers must make apprentices fully aware that we will still fund them to study towards English and /or maths where their employer agrees that it should be part of the training plan.

43.2.1 Note that if English and /or maths is a regulatory requirement or is an essential component of any mandatory qualification and forms part of the apprenticeship gateway requirement, it must be completed and evidenced as part of gateway requirements. This will be made clear on the relevant apprenticeship standards.

43.3. Acceptable equivalents are set out in a published list on GOV.UK.

43.4. If an apprentice is a restart onto the same apprenticeship programme, they will be subject to same age-based eligibility criteria as to when they left the programme.

44. The provider must document this discussion, and the decision made, as part of the initial assessment outcome for all learners.

44.1. If the apprentice, at any age, already holds evidence of a suitable equivalent qualification or where the apprentice is aged 19+ and their employer does not agree for a standalone English and /or maths qualification to be included as part of the programme, there is no mandatory requirement for the provider to carry out any form of assessment as part of the initial assessment.

Delivering English and /or maths Apprentices aged 16-18 when they begin their apprenticeship training

45. If a 16–18-year-old apprentice needs to study towards a standalone English and /or maths qualification, in order to achieve their apprenticeship, the provider must include this in the training plan, which is signed by the provider, employer and apprentice.

45.1. Providers must not claim for any funding for standalone English and /or maths qualifications until training has commenced.

45.2. The provider is responsible for ensuring that active learning for English and /or maths takes place in line with the signed training plan. For example, this means that if the training plan describes English and /or maths delivery as taking place in months 1,3 and 5 of the programme, providers must evidence this frequency of delivery.

45.3. The provider must deliver the necessary amount of training needed in readiness for the assessment(s).

45.4. The provider must provide written evidence at gateway that the apprentice has achieved English and /or maths. Apprentices aged 19+ when they begin their apprenticeship training

46. Where it is agreed, with the employer, that a 19+ apprentice will study towards a standalone English and /or maths qualification, the provider must include this in the training plan, which is signed by the provider, employer and apprentice.

46.1. Providers must not claim for any funding for standalone English and /or maths qualifications until training has commenced.

46.2. The provider is responsible for ensuring that active learning for English and /or maths takes place in line with the signed training plan. For example, this means that if the training plan describes English and /or maths delivery as taking place in months 1,3 and 5 of the programme, providers must evidence this frequency of delivery.

46.3. The provider must deliver the necessary amount of training needed in readiness for the assessment(s).

46.4. The provider must provide written evidence at gateway that the apprentice has attempted the assessment(s). The apprentice will not be required to achieve English and /or maths in order to achieve the apprenticeship.

47. Unusual retention and withdrawal patterns in English and /or maths provision for apprentices aged 19+ can be considered as a contextual factor in performance reviews under the Apprenticeship Accountability Framework.

Judgement of an apprentice’s current level

48. Where a standalone English and /or maths qualification is being funded as part of the programme, and the apprentice does not have acceptable evidence of previous attainment, the provider must carry out an assessment of their current level.

48.1. The provider must use current assessment tools based on the National Standards for Adult Literacy and Numeracy: Functional Skills: English and Functional Skills: Mathematics.

48.2. The assessment outcome is used to determine the level the apprentice must start working towards and does not remove the requirement to achieve the minimum required level in English and maths (see paragraphs

49 to 51).

What we will fund

49. A provider can claim funding for an apprentice who has not previously attained a GCSE grade A* to C (or 9 to 4) in English and /or maths on the day they start the following qualifications:

49.1. GCSE English language or maths (or both); or

49.2. Functional Skills English or maths up to level 2 (or both).

50. For level 2 apprenticeships, where a level 2 qualification in English or maths is not required for the apprenticeship and the apprentice does not already hold the acceptable qualifications for their standard, then the provider must adopt the following approach and can claim funding for an apprentice in the following scenarios:

50.1. Where the apprentice holds neither level 1 (Functional Skills level 1 or GCSE D to G or 3 to 1) nor level 2 (Functional Skills level 2 or GCSE A* to C or 9 to 4) approved qualifications:

50.1.1 The apprentice must study towards and if aged 16-18, must achieve English and maths qualifications of at least level 1 (Functional Skills level 1 or GCSE grade 3 - 1). Once level 1 (Functional Skills level 1 or GCSE grade 3 - 1) is secured, apprentices must work towards level 2 English and /or

maths (Functional Skills level 2 or GCSE 9 - 4) where there is time to make meaningful progress.

50.1.2 In recognition that a level 2 English and maths is at least two levels above the level of prior attainment, they are not required to attempt the level 2 assessment unless the provider is satisfied they are ready for assessment (for example from mock / practice attempts).

50.2. Where an apprentice already holds approved level 1 qualifications:

50.2.1 The apprentice must start, continue to study, and take the assessments for a level 2 English and /or maths (Functional Skills level 2 or GCSE 9 - 4). For apprentices aged 16-18, this requirement must be fulfilled in order for them to pass gateway. Apprentices (irrespective of age) should be assessed at level 2 for all three units of the English functional skills and the assessment for maths.

51. For apprentices aged 16-18 undertaking a level 3 or higher apprenticeship, it is a requirement that they hold or achieve an approved level 2 in both subjects before they can successfully complete the apprenticeship. These apprentices must commence tuition at the English and /or maths level immediately above the level at which they have been assessed at the start of their apprenticeship, in instances where this is lower than that required to pass gateway.

51.1. Where an apprentice is aged 19+ at the start of their apprenticeship training and opts-in to English and /or maths, we will fund them to study towards an approved level 2 in both subjects, but they do not need to achieve to pass gateway. These apprentices must commence tuition at the English and maths level immediately above the level at which they have been assessed at the start of their apprenticeship.

52. If the apprentice is made redundant, they are allowed to continue with their English and /or maths up to and including level 2.

53. The provider must not claim funding from any other DfE funding, including the adult skills fund (or equivalent in a strategic authority area) for English and /or maths qualifications that are eligible to be funded by the apprenticeships budget.

53.1. Where an apprentice is aged 19+ at the start of their apprenticeship training and their employer agrees that English and /or maths should be delivered as part of their training plan, the provider is responsible for delivering this training, or where agreed, using a subcontractor. Providers must not claim for any other DfE funding to deliver English and /or maths,

or place learners on a break in learning to claim for other DfE funding to deliver English and /or maths.

Exceptions to the regular English and maths minimum requirements, for people with special educational needs, learning difficulties or disabilities

54. Where an apprentice has a learning difficulty or disability which is a barrier to them achieving the English and /or maths requirements as described in paragraphs 49 to 51, providers should consider whether they should be offered the flexibility to achieve Entry Level 3 functional skills in the adjusted subject(s).

55. All individuals must be considered on a case-by-case basis and must satisfy all of the following conditions:

55.1. The apprentice has either an existing or previously issued education, health and care (EHC) plan (or one of the legacy equivalents: a statement of special educational need (SEN) or a learning difficulty assessment (LDA)), or the provider ensures that a thorough and evidence-based assessment (which uses a combination of robust methods) of the individual apprentices’ learning difficulty or disability has been completed in a formal and structured manner by an appropriate professional (for example, the head of special education needs (SEN), or an equivalent individual with suitable knowledge and expertise) and a barrier has been identified. Self-declaration of a learning difficulty or a disability is insufficient.

55.2. The provider and the employer expect the apprentice to achieve all other aspects of the apprenticeship requirements, become occupationally competent and achieve entry level 3 functional skills in the adjusted subject(s) before the end of their apprenticeship.

55.3. The provider is able to demonstrate that even with support, reasonable adjustments and stepping stone qualifications, the apprentice will not be able to achieve English and /or maths to the level as described in paragraphs 49 to 51 within the timeframe projected for them to complete all the occupational elements.

55.4. Depending on the apprentice’s individual circumstances and outcome of the provider’s judgement, the exception outlined above may apply to either English and /or maths. If the exception applies to only one subject, the regular requirements for the non-adjusted subject will apply.

55.5. The provider must retain all elements of the judgement in the evidence pack.

56. Although the apprentice will be exempt from the regular English and /or maths minimum requirements, providers must plan and evidence how the apprentice will access further literacy and numeracy development, including level 1 and level 2 courses, as part of their overall training provision, if appropriate. This rule only applies if the apprentice meets all of the criteria set out in paragraph

55. The judgement must be formal and structured and conducted by an appropriate professional associated with the provider (or subcontractor), such as the head of special educational needs (SEN) or student support, or an equivalent individual with suitable knowledge and expertise. It must include:

56.1. A judgement of the apprentice’s current English and maths ability;

56.2. Information on how the learning difficulty or disability affects the apprentice’s English and maths abilities and a clear indication of whether English and /or maths are affected;

56.3. A judgement of the apprentice’s ability to meet the regular English and maths requirements even with appropriate support in place;

56.4. The creation of a recommended learning plan to enable the apprentice to achieve entry-level 3 functional skills in the adjusted subject(s) and, where appropriate, to continue to build on their literacy and numeracy skills by accessing further courses; and

56.5. A copy of an education, health and care (EHC) plan (or one of the legacy equivalents: a statement of special educational need (SEN) or a learning difficulty assessment (LDA)) or the evidence of the assessment as outlined in 55.1.

57. These flexibilities apply to new starts and to apprentices currently on-programme where the learning difficulty or disability has been identified and evidenced as a barrier to them achieving the requirements stated in paragraphs

49 to 51.

58. If the apprentice disagrees with the judgement outcome, the provider must provide a facility for the apprentice to request a second opinion and must ensure that a second SEN professional independently reviews the outcome. The provider may determine the format of the review process.

Evidence requirements For all learners the provider has:

• Discussed with the employer and apprentice, whether the apprentice will study towards a standalone English and /or maths qualification as part of their apprenticeship and has documented this decision.

Where a standalone English and /or maths qualification has been included in the programme (for 16–18-year-old apprentices who do not hold the required level of English and /or maths for the standard, and for 19+ apprentices who have been opted in by their employer), the provider has:

• Detailed how English and maths will be delivered in the training plan and has evidence of delivery taking place against that plan, in line with the active learning requirement.

• Written evidence of the apprentice undertaking the assessment(s) and, for 16-18-year-old learners, achieving the relevant qualifications.

• Where applicable, provided a justification (not retrospective) about how they have arrived at the judgement as to whether the apprentice has enough time to make meaningful progress towards level 2 English and /or maths. This must be judged at an individual level.

• Provided additional information where the apprentice is assessed as exempt from the normal English and maths requirements. In these circumstances the provider must also include:

͂ Details which show a thorough and evidence-based individualised assessment (which uses a combination of robust methods) of the apprentices’ learning difficulty or disability has been conducted and a copy of the authorisation by an appropriate professional, for example the head of special education needs (SEN) or student support;

͂ Evidence of how the apprentice’s learning difficulty or disability affects their English and /or maths abilities;

The outcome of the initial assessment

59. After completing the initial assessment, the provider must be able to evidence that the individual requires significant new knowledge, skills and behaviours in order to be occupationally competent in their job role, and that the training required meets the funding rules. They must discuss or share the outcome of the initial assessment with the individual and their employer, so that all parties understand the results and how these results will inform a tailored training plan for the apprentice.

59.1. This outcome can be discussed face to face or virtually or can be agreed / documented via email or as part of the signed training plan. There must be evidence that the employer agrees with the information provided.

59.2. The discussion / documented outcome must include the activities covered by the initial assessment (i.e. learner eligibility, programme eligibility (following an assessment of relevant prior learning), learning support

͂ Evidence that support, reasonable adjustments, and access arrangements have been considered and the apprentice will not be able to achieve English and /or maths to the minimum level.

͂ The apprentice’s recommended learning plan to achieve entry level 3 in English and /or maths (as appropriate); and

͂ Where applicable, the apprentice’s education, health and care (EHC) plan (or one of the legacy equivalents: a statement of special educational need (SEN) or learning difficulty assessment (LDA)).

New for 1 August 2025

59 Clarification: That the provider must evidence that the individual requires significant new knowledge, skills and behaviours in order to be occupationally competent in their job role, and that the training required meets the funding rules. (This text was removed from the rules in 23/24 as part of the simplification exercise but we have received feedback to suggest it should be reinstated).

60 Clarification: The provider must give the learner the opportunity to declare their eligibility for the care leavers’ bursary.

(where the apprentice has given their consent for this to be shared with their employer) and support for English and maths)). The provider must also include the points listed in paragraphs 60 to 62 below.

60. The provider must give the learner the opportunity to declare their eligibility for the care leavers’ bursary, if the apprentice is aged 24 or younger (see paragraph 108).

61. The provider must agree with the employer:

61.1. That an apprenticeship is the most appropriate training programme for the individual;

61.2. That all relevant prior learning and experience has been identified and properly accounted for in the design of the training plan, which has been adjusted accordingly;

61.3. That the training plan aligns with an approved apprenticeship standard, at the most appropriate level;

61.4. That the individual’s job role has a productive purpose and there is a direct link between the selected apprenticeship standard and the individual’s job role;

61.5. How all parties will work together to achieve the apprenticeship (i.e. roles and responsibilities of the provider, employer, and apprentice); and.

61.6. The price of the apprenticeship (see paragraph 179). It must be clear to the employer from the outset how much they will need to contribute (if applicable).

62. The employer must agree with the provider to:

62.1. Provide the individual with the appropriate support and supervision to carry out both their job role and their apprenticeship (including the end-point assessment);

62.2. Release the apprentice for off-the-job training (and English and /or maths training if required), as documented in the training plan;

62.3. Provide the apprentice with the opportunity and support to embed and consolidate the knowledge, skills and behaviours, gained through off-the-job training, into the workplace; and

62.4. Take part or provide input into progress reviews.

Evidence requirements The provider has:

• Confirmed, after completing the 4 key areas of initial assessment as outlined in paragraph 23 (namely learner eligibility, programme eligibility, learning support and English and maths support), that the individual requires significant new knowledge, skills and behaviours in order to be occupationally competent in their job role, and that both the individual and the programme are eligible for funding.

• Discussed and agreed the initial assessment and its outcome with the employer and the apprentice. They have taken account of relevant prior learning and experience, and relevant learning difficulties or disabilities, in the design and proposed delivery of the apprenticeship and has explained to the employer and apprentice how this information has informed a tailored training plan.

• Evidence that the employer agrees with the information provided (this could be in the form of an email or a signed training plan which has incorporated the initial assessment information).

• Evidence that they have informed the apprentice about the care leavers’ bursary, if the apprentice is aged 24 or younger.

• Agreed with the employer the conditions listed in paragraph 61*. The employer has:

• Agreed to the conditions listed in paragraph 62*.

*Agreement to these conditions can be embedded in the signed training plan or the contract for services.

Programme eligibility

Overview

63. An apprenticeship is a job with training. Through an apprenticeship, an apprentice will gain the technical knowledge, practical experience and wider skills and behaviours that they need to be competent in their immediate job and future career. The apprentice will gain this through:

63.1. Formal off-the-job training (which is the responsibility of the provider); and

63.2. The opportunity to apply these new skills in a real work environment, in a productive job role (which is the responsibility of the apprentice’s employer).

64. All new apprentices must start on an approved apprenticeship standard.

64.1. We will fund an apprentice to undertake an apprenticeship at a higher level than a qualification they already hold, including a previous apprenticeship.

64.2. We will fund an apprentice to undertake an apprenticeship at the same or lower level than a qualification they already hold, if the apprenticeship will allow the individual to acquire significant new skills and the provider can show that the content of the training is materially different from any prior qualification or a previous apprenticeship.

Employment arrangements (between the employer and the apprentice)

65. Unless the apprentice is on an alternative English apprenticeship, the provider must verify that the individual is employed and is working under a contract of employment that is long enough for the apprentice to complete the apprenticeship, including the end-point assessment.

Evidence requirements

• Where relevant, the provider has used the information gained from the initial assessment to justify an apprenticeship at the same or lower level than a qualification the apprentice already holds (e.g. the personal learning record and the skills scan should provide evidence that such a programme will lead to significant new skills and that the learning is materially different).

65.1. If the apprentice has more than one employer at any time (e.g. two part-time job roles), then only one of these employers can be used for the purposes of the apprenticeship. This is so it is clear who is undertaking the role of ‘employer’, as defined by these funding rules.

65.2. The apprentice must be included in the PAYE scheme declared in the apprenticeship service account.

65.3. The employer may agree with another organisation (e.g. in their supply chain) to second the apprentice for part of the apprenticeship, subject to all parties agreeing. The apprentice must spend at least 50% of their apprenticeship duration with the employer whose PAYE scheme they are on, unless they are:

65.3.1 Employed by a registered Flexi-Job Apprenticeship Agency (see paragraphs 259 to 263);

65.3.2 Part of the NHS Workforce Sharing Agreement;

65.3.3 Members of the British Armed Forces on secondment / placement to the NHS; or

65.3.4 Seconded to an organisation who is part of a Pooled PAYE scheme and is therefore unable to access apprenticeship funding in their own right.

Evidence requirements The provider has:

• Evidenced that the apprentice is employed, and that this contract is for a period of time which is long enough for the apprentice to complete the apprenticeship, including the end-point assessment. This can be a relevant extract from a contract of employment or it could be a signed declaration by the employer as part of the training plan.

• Confirmed with the employer that the apprentice is included in the PAYE scheme declared in the apprenticeship service account.

• Confirmed with the employer that any secondment meets the rule / exceptions set out in paragraph 65.3.

Apprenticeship agreement (between the employer and the apprentice)

66. Unless the apprentice is on an alternative English apprenticeship, the provider must have evidence that the apprentice has an apprenticeship agreement with their employer, from the start of and for the actual duration of their apprenticeship.

66.1. This is defined in section A1(3) of the Apprenticeships, Skills, Children and Learning Act 2009 (as amended by the Enterprise Act 2016) and the Apprenticeships (Miscellaneous Provisions) Regulations 2017.

66.2. A template apprenticeship agreement is available on GOV.UK. Where an alternative template is used, the requirements of the legislation as described below (see paragraph 68) must be met when forming an apprenticeship agreement.

66.3. The employer must give a copy of the completed apprenticeship agreement to the provider.

66.4. The agreement must be extended if the programme is extended.

67. The provider must check that the apprenticeship agreement between the employer and the apprentice is complete, that the information regarding the apprenticeship is correct, and that the agreement has been signed by both parties (the employer and the apprentice).

67.1. It is prohibited for someone to sign a contract, including an apprenticeship agreement, as both the apprentice and as the employer (even where a limited company, public services company, a partnership, or limited liability partnership has been created to act as a separate corporate entity).

67.2. The provider must check that there is a separate, identifiable line manager who is undertaking the role of the ‘employer’.

68. If the apprenticeship agreement is incomplete, or not signed, the individual will not have a valid agreement and the provider will therefore not be eligible to receive funding for them. The apprenticeship agreement must include:

68.1. The apprentice’s details (name, place of work);

New for 1 August 2025

66.4 Clarification: The apprenticeship agreement must be extended if the programme is extended. (Note that this is already on the GOV.UK template and has been copied to the funding rules for completeness only).

68.2. The apprenticeship standard and level;

68.3. The start and end date of the apprenticeship (these dates include the end-point assessment);

68.4. The start and end date of the practical period (this is the part of the apprenticeship where evidenced learning is delivered; this does not include the end-point assessment);

68.4.1 The practical period start date may be the same date as the apprenticeship start date. This is common for existing members of staff who are already employed in their job role when they become an apprentice and begin their training.

68.4.2 If an individual has been recruited specifically into a business as an apprentice, the practical period start date may be later than the apprenticeship start date. This is so the individual can begin their job role first (the apprenticeship start date) and then begin their training (the practical period start date). These dates would usually be no more than 2-3 weeks apart.

68.4.3 The practical period start date aligns with the learning start date in the ILR and the practical period end date aligns with the planned learning end date in the ILR.

68.5. The duration of the practical period (see paragraphs 73 to 76 regarding minimum duration); and

68.6. The amount of time the apprentice will spend in off-the-job training (see paragraph 80).

Alternative English apprenticeship

69. If an apprentice is not directly employed by an employer, the provider must verify that the individual can be funded through an alternative English apprenticeship. These alternative arrangements include:

Evidence requirements

• The provider has a signed copy of a complete (and therefore valid) apprenticeship agreement (along with any revisions) and that this agreement meets the criteria set out in paragraphs 67 to 68. The agreement has not been signed by the same person, acting as both the apprentice and the employer.

69.1. Apprentices who have been made redundant and are eligible to continue their apprenticeship (see paragraphs 279 to 283);

69.2. Particular office holders, namely constables of English police forces and ministers or trainee ministers of a religious denomination;

69.3. Apprentices taking part in the portable flexi-job apprenticeship pilot (see paragraph 12); and

69.4. Apprentices who are prisoners (see paragraphs 264 to 265).

70. In relation to these alternative English apprentices, except for the requirement to have evidence of employment and an apprenticeship agreement, the provider and /or the employer must comply with all of the other rules as set out in this document.

Apprentice wages

71. Every apprentice must be paid a lawful wage for the time they are in work and in active learning. The employer is responsible for paying the apprentice’s wages and complying with national minimum wage regulations.

71.1. The employer must only use the apprentice rate of the national minimum wage from the apprenticeship start date (see paragraph 68) and not before.

71.2. If an employer does not pay an apprentice a lawful wage, the provider is ineligible to receive apprenticeship funding.

71.3. Where an individual permanently withdraws from the apprenticeship and is no longer an apprentice, the employer must not continue to use the apprentice rate of the national minimum wage. This does not apply to those on a break in learning.

72. The provider must confirm with the employer that the apprentice is being paid a lawful wage whilst they are on the apprenticeship.

Evidence requirements

• The provider has confirmed that the apprentice meets one of the conditions of an alternative English apprenticeship. In the case of redundancy, the evidence requirements are listed in the redundancy section (paragraphs 279 to 283).

72.1. Apprentices aged 19 or over who have completed the first year of their apprenticeship must thereafter receive at least the correct national minimum wage for their age.

72.2. Further information on the national minimum wage, the apprenticeship rate and the definition of an employee can be found on GOV.UK. or via the ACAS helpline.

72.3. For prisoner apprenticeships in the closed estate, the wage must be compliant with the HMPPS policy (see paragraph 265).

Minimum duration and employment hours

Evidence requirements

• The provider has confirmed with the employer that the apprentice is receiving a lawful wage whilst they are on the apprenticeship. This evidence can be a copy of the employment terms and conditions or a written statement regarding wages on the training plan (which is subsequently signed by the employer).

• The employer has not used the apprentice rate prior to the apprenticeship start date (the date shown on the apprenticeship agreement).

New for 1 August 2025

73 Policy change: For new starts from 1 August 2025, the minimum duration has reduced to 8 months (from 12 months). The legislation required to implement this change is expected to be in force by 1 August 2025.

74.1 Clarification: The new minimum duration has been reflected in this paragraph in relation to learners subject to redundancy.

75 Policy change: As a result of the changes to the off-the-job training policy, there is no longer a requirement for the provider to automatically extend the expected duration of the apprenticeship if, at the beginning of the apprenticeship, the apprentice works fewer than 30 hours a week or has a zero-hours contract. However, the provider must still consider the working hours, in setting the duration, so that training expectations are realistic. This change applies only to new starts from 1 August 2025.

Minimum duration of practical period

73. The provider must confirm that, after all relevant prior learning and experience has been taken into account, the apprenticeship practical period lasts for a minimum duration of 8 months. For example, to satisfy this requirement, an apprentice who starts their training on 1 August 2025 must still be receiving training on 31 March

2026. 73.1. The apprenticeship standard specification or assessment plan may require this practical period of training to be longer, to support the delivery of the full apprenticeship content.

73.2. The end-point assessment can only be taken after the minimum duration has been met.

73.3. The minimum duration of each apprenticeship is based on the apprentice working at least 30 hours per week, including any off-the-job training they undertake. Working fewer than 30 hours per week or having a zero-hours contract must not be a barrier to successfully completing an apprenticeship.

Episodes of learning below the minimum duration requirement

74. The only circumstances in which an episode of apprenticeship learning can fall below the minimum duration requirement are set out below. For these, the provider must have evidence that the total amount of time spent on the apprenticeship, which may include more than one episode of learning, meets the minimum duration requirement. Circumstances include where the apprentice:

74.1. Is made redundant with more than six, but less than eight months remaining before their final day;

74.2. Transfers onto a newer version of the same apprenticeship standard (where the ST standard code remains the same);

74.3. Transfers between providers but remains on the same apprenticeship standard; or

74.4. Returns to the same apprenticeship after a break in learning or withdrawal.

Part-time employment hours (<30 hours per week) and zero-hours employment contracts

75. If, at the beginning of the apprenticeship, the apprentice works fewer than 30 hours a week, or has a zero-hours contract, the provider must consider the apprentice’s working hours when setting a duration for these learners, so that

training expectations are realistic. There is no requirement for the provider to automatically extend the expected duration of the apprenticeship for all part-time apprentices.

75.1. The provider must agree, with the employer, that the expected duration of the apprenticeship for a part-time apprentice is realistic.

75.2. Zero-hours contracts are only acceptable where all of the other funding rules can be met.

76. Any apprentice, including those who are part-time or on a zero-hours contract, can complete the requirements of the apprenticeship standard earlier than their learning planned end date, where it is practical and possible to do so, provided the minimum duration (8 months) and the minimum off-the-job hours have both been met.

Evidence requirements The provider has:

• Confirmed, following an initial assessment, that the individual requires an apprenticeship practical period that meets the minimum duration of 8 months, after any relevant prior learning has been recognised. This can be evidenced via the dates on the ILR and associated paperwork.

• Evidenced, for the circumstances described in paragraph 74, that the total amount of time spent on the apprenticeship, which may include more than one episode of learning, meets the minimum duration requirement.

• Evidenced, where the apprentice works part-time (fewer than 30 hours per week) or is on a zero-hours contract, that they have considered the working hours and have set a realistic duration.

Off-the-job training

New for 1 August 2025

79.2 Clarification: When we say English and /or maths is excluded from off-the-job training we mean stand-alone qualifications rather than where English and /or maths has been embedded into the occupational content of a standard.

80 Policy change: Providers will no longer need to calculate the minimum off-the-job training hours for each apprentice; the minimum requirement (for an apprentice with no prior learning) will be published on each standard. (Temporarily, due to the transition of the Institute’s website to Skills England, this information can be found in Annex C).

81 Policy change: To be eligible for government funding, an apprentice with no relevant prior learning must receive at least the published volume of off-the-job training hours for the standard. This figure can only be reduced if there is evidence of relevant prior learning. The resulting programme, with a corresponding price reduction, must not fall below 187 hours of evidenced delivery or 8 months in actual duration. Funds are at risk of recovery if the off-the-job training minimum requirement (reduced where applicable for prior learning) is not met.

82 Policy change: We are simplifying the off-the-job training policy and removing the delivery link between the minimum required hours and the apprentice’s planned (or actual) time on programme. We believe that this will allow for increased delivery flexibility. A provider can deliver the published minimum required hours, reduced where appropriate for relevant and evidenced prior learning, over any timeframe (subject to meeting the minimum duration of 8 months) without it impacting of the volume of off-the-job training required.

82.3 Policy change: There will no longer be a distinction between a full-time and a part-time apprentice in relation to off-the-job training delivery. This means that providers will no longer have to automatically extend the programme for part-time apprentices. However, when setting the duration, the provider must consider working hours so that training expectations are realistic.

84 Policy change: The planned hours documented for each learner must be at least the published figure on the standard/Annex C, or a reduced figure if there is evidence of relevant prior learning.

What off-the-job training is

77. Off-the-job training is a statutory requirement for an English apprenticeship. The provider must verify that the off-the-job training delivered to the apprentice meets the following definition:

77.1. It is training which is received by the apprentice within their practical period, during the apprentice’s normal working hours, for the purpose of achieving the knowledge, skills and behaviours of the apprenticeship they are undertaking. By normal working hours we mean the hours for which the apprentice would normally be paid, excluding overtime.

New for 1 August 2025 (continued)

86 Clarification: The provider is ultimately responsible for the delivery of all required off-the-job training, to enable the apprentice to reach full occupational competence against the standard, even if another party (e.g. subcontractor, employer, learner) delivers this training.

86.3 Clarification: The learning end date must only be recorded when the last piece of learning has been delivered (irrespective of who has delivered the training). 87-90 Clarification: In this section, active learning has been renamed as OTJT active learning, to distinguish it from the new English and maths active learning requirement. Providers must comply with both active learning rules separately where English and /or maths funding is being accessed.

- Policy change: As we are publishing a minimum off-the-job training hours requirement for each standard and removing the delivery link between these hours and the duration, there is no longer a need to obtain an employer statement where the actual hours delivered are less than the planned hours. We have therefore removed this section. All policy changes referenced above are for new starts from 1 August 2025 only.

New for 15 July 2025 – Version 2

81.1 Clarification: We have made it clearer that the provider’s planned hours must be at least equal to, but can be more than, the published OTJT minimum requirement for the standard. 92-94 Update: We have re-instated the employer statement section which was missing from Version 1; this must be completed where the actual training hours are less than the planned hours that have been agreed with the employer.

77.2. It is not on-the-job training, which is training received by the apprentice for the sole purpose of enabling the apprentice to perform the work for which they have been employed. By this we mean training that does not specifically link to the knowledge, skills and behaviours set out in the apprenticeship.

77.3. Further information about off-the-job training can be found on GOV.UK.

What can be included

78. The provider must ensure that off-the-job training delivers new skills that are directly relevant to the apprenticeship standard. This can include:

78.1. The teaching of theory (e.g. lectures, role playing, simulation exercises, online learning and manufacturer training);

78.2. Practical training (e.g. shadowing, mentoring, industry visits and participation in competitions);

78.3. Learning support;

78.4. Time spent writing assignments; and

78.5. Revision.

What must not be included

79. The provider must ensure that the following activities are not included as off-the-job training:

79.1. Initial assessment and onboarding activities;

79.2. English and maths standalone qualifications (where required, these must be delivered in addition to the minimum off-the-job training requirement);

79.3. Training to acquire knowledge, skills and behaviours that are not required by the apprenticeship standard;

79.4. Progress reviews;

79.5. Examinations and other on-programme testing (e.g. linked to a qualification or the EPA); and

79.6. Training which takes place outside the apprentice’s normal working hours;

79.6.1 If off-the-job training must, by exception, take place outside of these hours, the apprentice must agree and be compensated for this arrangement (e.g. time off in lieu or an

additional payment). The majority of the training must not be delivered in this way.

Calculating off-the-job training

80. The minimum volume of off-the-job training for all apprentices (full-time, part-time, term-time), will be published on the front of each apprenticeship standard. (Temporarily, due to the transition to Skills England, this information can be found in Annex C – Off-the-job training: minimum requirement for each apprenticeship standard). This published figure:

80.1. Represents the full occupational content of the standard.

80.2. Represents the minimum delivery requirement for an apprentice with no relevant prior learning.

81. To be eligible for government funding the provider must ensure that an apprentice with no relevant prior learning receives at least the published volume of off-the-job training hours for the standard.

81.1. A provider can plan to deliver more than the published minimum requirement but can only deliver less if there is evidence of relevant prior learning from the apprentice’s initial assessment (see paragraph 35). For example: A learner has no prior learning and the standard requires a minimum of 466 off-the-job training hours. The provider plans to deliver more than the minimum requirement (550 hours) and the learner completes with 500 hours of evidenced delivery. This is a compliant programme (although an employer statement would be needed to explain the difference between planned and actual hours (see paragraph 92). If the above learner has 50 hours of prior learning the provider would follow the RPL policy (see paragraph 35.2) and reduce their typical planned hours from 550 hours to 500 hours. For compliance purposes the minimum requirement for the standard would also reduce, by the same amount (from 466 hours to 416 hours), to account for the prior learning. Provided the learner received more than 416 hours of training this would be a compliant programme, provided the employer statement (where necessary) had been obtained.

81.2. No programme must fall below 187 hours of evidenced delivery or 8 months in actual duration.

81.3. Some apprentices and standards will need more than the minimum requirement. Apprentices must receive the volume of high-quality

apprenticeship training that they need to develop full occupational competence.

81.4. Funds are at risk of recovery if the off-the-job training minimum requirement is not met.

82. The provider must agree with the employer the volume of off-the-job training hours and the most appropriate timeframe and delivery model in which to deliver the training.

82.1. There is no longer a direct delivery link between the required hours and the apprentice’s planned (or actual) duration. The planned hours, reduced if necessary to account for relevant and evidenced prior learning, can be delivered over any timeframe, provided the statutory minimum duration (of

8 months) is met. For example, if the standard required 278 hours, and the apprentice had no prior learning, this training could be delivered over 8 months, 12 months or 15 months; the duration will depend on learner and employer choice / need. If an apprentice, on the same standard, had evidence of relevant prior learning, then the provider could reduce the required hours, in line with this evidence, from 278 to 187 (187 being the lowest volume for a compliant programme), and again choose the most appropriate timeframe over which to deliver the training (subject to meeting the statutory minimum duration of 8 months).

82.2. The provider must still adhere to the active learning requirements (see paragraphs 87 to 90).

82.3. The programme does not need to be automatically extended to account for a part-time apprentice. However, when setting the duration for a part-time apprentice the provider must consider their working hours, so that training expectations are realistic.

Documenting off-the-job training

83. All planned and eligible off-the-job training activity (see paragraph 78) must be agreed in advance of delivery and the provider must document the activity as part of the agreed training plan (for longer programmes see paragraph 95.1.2).

84. The provider must document the number of planned off-the-job training hours, for the full apprenticeship, on the apprenticeship agreement, the training plan and the individualised learner record (ILR).

84.1. Providers must use their own typical planned hours for the standard which must be at least equal to, but can be more than, the off-the-job training minimum requirement published on the standard (or in Annex C). The figure can be reduced only where there is evidence of relevant prior learning.

84.2. The planned off-the-job training hours figure on the ILR must not be changed once it has been submitted, except for a data input error at the beginning of the programme.

85. The provider must also document actual off-the-job training hours, at the end of the practical period or where the apprentice leaves the apprenticeship early as a non-completer.

85.1. Actual delivery information may inform future iterations of each standard’s minimum requirement.

Delivering off-the-job training

86. The provider is ultimately responsible for the delivery of all required off-the-job training, to enable the apprentice to reach full occupational competence against the standard, even if another party (e.g. subcontractor, employer) delivers this training. They must agree with the employer when, where and how the training will be delivered.

86.1. The entire apprenticeship must not be fully delivered by self-directed distance learning.

86.2. All training must take place during the practical period, between the learning start date and the learning end date reported in the ILR.

86.3. The learning end date must only be recorded when the last piece of training relevant to the standard has been delivered. Front-loaded and block release delivery models

87. If delivery is via a front-loaded or a block release model (see glossary definitions), the provider must agree this delivery model with the employer and this must be documented in the signed training plan.

88. The provider is responsible for ensuring that there is a plan for off-the-job training active learning (OTJT active learning) to take place at least every 3 calendar months of the practical period (from the learning start date to the learning actual end date). For example, if delivery takes place on 1 August 2025, OTJT active learning must next take place on or before 30 November 2025.

88.1. A break in learning must be used where there is no plan for OTJT active learning to take place within a 3-calendar month period.

88.2. If planned off-the-job training is unable to take place as scheduled in any 3-calendar month period, a retrospective break in learning must be used. All other delivery models

89. If the training plan does not clearly show an agreed front-loaded or block release delivery model (see glossary definitions), the provider is responsible for ensuring that there is a plan for OTJT active learning to take place at least in every calendar month of the practical period (from the learning start date to the learning actual end date). For example, if delivery takes place on 1 August 2025, delivery must next take place on or before 30 September 2025.

89.1. A break in learning must be used where there is no plan for OTJT active learning to take place within a calendar month. The only exception to this is for those apprentices with a term-time only contract, where we do not require a break in learning for the month of August (i.e. the summer holiday period).

89.2. If planned off-the-job training is unable to take place as scheduled in any calendar month, a retrospective break in learning is not required as long as there is OTJT active learning in the following calendar month. Where there is no OTJT active learning for 2 consecutive calendar months, a retrospective break in learning must be used. The provider must ensure that all missed activity is re-planned and delivered, so that the full content of the training plan can still be delivered. Principles

90. OTJT active learning does not need to be delivered by the provider; it can include any activity that has been agreed and documented as part of the agreed training plan. When the training documented on the training plan is complete, the practical period is complete.

90.1. Some occupations require the provider to be approved by a regulatory body before being able to deliver training for the apprenticeship. We may take action to recover apprenticeship funding where providers have delivered training but do not have the necessary approval.

90.2. Apprentices on maternity, adoption or shared parental leave may use their statutory keep in touch (KIT / SPLIT) days to continue with apprenticeship training, assessment or end-point assessment during their period of leave (please refer to paragraphs 284 to 293).

Evidencing off-the-job training

91. The provider is responsible for retaining evidence to support both their own delivery and that of others (e.g. subcontractors, employers, learners). The evidence must be quantifiable and must meet the OTJT definition (namely that it teaches new knowledge, skills and behaviours; is directly relevant to the apprenticeship, takes place in the apprentice’s normal working hours; and excludes the activities listed in paragraph 79).

91.1. A template evidence form is available on GOV.UK. It is not mandatory to use this template.

Planned hours agreed at the beginning of the apprenticeship versus actual hours delivered

92. At the end of the practical period, if the actual volume of off-the-job training delivered is less than the original volume planned and agreed with the employer, the provider must produce a statement to summarise the following information:

92.1. The original volume of planned hours agreed with the employer.

92.2. The volume of hours actually delivered (supported by proof of delivery).

92.3. The reason for delivering less.

92.4. Confirmation that the volume of hours delivered met the off-the-job training minimum requirement for the apprenticeship standard.

92.4.1 If RPL applies, this can be factored into the above statement (see example in paragraph 81.1).

93. The provider must arrange for the employer and apprentice to sign this statement, to confirm they are satisfied by the training delivered, even though this was less than the volume of training originally agreed.

93.1. This statement compares the original intent with what was delivered; it is not a substitute for the training plan being updated, where necessary, on an ongoing basis (e.g. as a result of progress reviews) (see paragraph 98.4).

94. Where a signed statement is required, this must be completed, signed and made available as part of the evidence pack within 12 weeks of the apprentice completing their apprenticeship. Where this is not available, funds may be at risk of recovery.

Evidence requirements The provider has:

• Set a planned OTJT hours value which is at least equal to, but can be more than, the OTJT requirement on the standard / Annex C for a learner with no prior learning. They have adjusted this figure, if necessary, to account for relevant and evidenced prior learning.

• Agreed, with the employer, an appropriate timeframe in which to deliver the required hours.

• Documented the planned volume of off-the-job training hours on the training plan and the ILR and has confirmed that this has also been documented on the employer’s apprenticeship agreement. All volumes and dates align.

• Delivered or arranged for the delivery of off-the-job training. If the delivery model is a front-loaded or a block release model, this has been agreed with the employer and documented in the training plan.

• Planned for OTJT active learning to take place every calendar month (every 3 calendar months for front-loaded and block release models) and a break in learning has been used where there was no plan (see paragraphs 88.1 to 88.2 and 89.1 to 89.2).

• Where relevant, been approved by the relevant regulatory body before delivering apprenticeship training and there is evidence of this approval.

• Documented the actual volume of off-the-job training hours on the ILR when the learner exits the apprenticeship (completers and early leavers) and ensured that this value is supported by proof of delivery. The actual hours can be higher than the planned hours (to account for individual provider delivery models). All delivery evidence must be quantifiable and must meet the definition given in paragraphs 77 and 78. No ineligible activities (see paragraph 79) have been included. The evidence should include a broad description of the activity or the session it relates to (e.g. subject title or module / lesson number) to enable a cross-check against the training plan.

• Where the actual hours are less than the planned hours, produced a statement to explain the difference and this has been signed by all parties.

Funds are at risk of recovery if the off-the-job training policy is not met.

The training plan

95. The provider is responsible for developing and agreeing a training plan with the apprentice and the employer. The apprentice and employer must be given the opportunity to contribute to this plan.

95.1. The broad content of the training plan must be agreed before any training is delivered. If the provider is able to get a signed training plan in place prior to any delivery, they should do so.

95.1.1 Where the initial agreement (of the broad content) is virtual or via email, and the provider is unable to get a signed version of the training plan in place before any training is delivered, the provider must be able to evidence this broad agreement (e.g. an email from the employer) and have a fully signed version of the plan in place by the end of the 42 day ‘qualifying day’ period.

95.1.2 We accept that for longer apprenticeships full content details may not be known at the start. Where this is the case, the signed plan must list the total volume of planned hours (for the entire apprenticeship) with additional content information being added as this becomes available.

95.2. Funding can only be claimed from the date on which learning activity that is related to the apprenticeship and documented in the training plan begins and can be evidenced.

95.3. The training plan and apprenticeship agreement must be separate documents (each document has a different purpose and different signature requirements (i.e. the provider is not a signatory to the apprenticeship agreement but they are a signatory to the training plan)).

95.4. A template training plan is available on GOV.UK. It is not mandatory to use this template. Where an alternative is used, it must comply with paragraph

96 below.

96. The provider must make sure the training plan includes:

New for 1 August 2025

96.7 Clarification: References to English and /or maths have been updated to make it clear that we mean stand-alone qualifications rather than where English and/or maths has been embedded into the occupational content of a standard.

96.1. The name of the apprentice, their job role and normal working hours. By normal working hours we mean the number of paid hours they work each week excluding overtime.

96.2. Details of all relevant parties (the provider, employer, any subcontractors and the end-point assessment organisation).

96.2.1 If the end-point assessment organisation is not known at the start of the apprenticeship, the training plan must be updated as soon as this information becomes available. This must be no later than 6 months before the learning planned end date (see paragraph 115).

96.3. Details of the apprenticeship, including the name of the apprenticeship standard, the level, the start and end dates for both the apprenticeship and the practical period of training.

96.4. The total volume of planned off-the-job training hours (see paragraph 81).

96.5. A brief description of the delivery model (e.g. day release, block release, front-loaded – see glossary).

96.6. Details of the occupational training to be delivered:

96.6.1 For standards with a mandatory qualification this must be, as a minimum, a list of the units, along with a description of any additional activities that the apprentice will undertake to develop occupational competency.

96.6.2 For standards without a mandatory qualification this must be a description of the activities that the apprentice will undertake to develop occupational competency.

96.6.3 It must be clear if the occupational training has been included in the planned off-the-job training hours.

96.7. Details of any English and /or maths standalone qualifications to be delivered (see paragraphs 43 to 58)

96.7.1 It must be clear that English and /or maths standalone qualifications have not been included in the planned off-the-job training hours.

96.8. The training plan must not include any content that has been identified and agreed with the employer, as relevant prior learning (see paragraphs 30 to 35).

96.9. Details of when content will be delivered.

96.10. Details of who is responsible for each component of delivery.

96.10.1 This may include the provider, a subcontractor or the employer. Where this party is accessing apprenticeship funding for the delivery, they must be on the Apprenticeship Provider and Assessment Register (APAR) (unless the exemptions at paragraphs 231.3 to 231.5 apply).

96.11. Written confirmation from the employer that the apprentice will be allowed to undertake off-the-job training within their normal working hours, in addition to English and maths standalone qualifications if required.

96.12. Summary details of progress reviews, including the frequency and format (see paragraphs 97 to 98).

96.13. The process for resolving any queries or complaints regarding the apprenticeship. This must include details of the escalation route within the main provider’s own organisation and the escalation process to Apprenticeship Service Support on 08000 150 600 or mailto:helpdesk@manage-apprenticeships.service.gov.uk

Progress reviews

97. During the practical period, the provider must undertake a progress review, to discuss the progress to date of the apprentice against their training plan, at least every 3 calendar months. For example, if a progress review takes place on 1 August 2025, the next review must take place on or before 30 November 2025.

97.1. If there is an evidenced delivery reason, such as module length, that means an alternative frequency is more appropriate the provider must be able to evidence that this has been agreed with the employer. Learning support reviews (where applicable) must still take place at least every 3 calendar months.

97.2. The review must be a three-way discussion involving the provider, employer and the apprentice. Progress reviews can be face to face, virtual or can be via email.

97.2.1 If the employer is unable to attend they must be given the opportunity to contribute. This must not become the default

Evidence requirements The provider has:

• A copy of the current training plan, signed and dated by all parties (along with any previous versions) and this meets the criteria set out in paragraph 96. It has been kept up to date with any material changes (e.g. as a result of a change of circumstance or a progress review).

• Evidence that the plan was agreed by all parties prior to training being delivered (where this was agreed virtually / by correspondence, a signed plan was in place by the end of the 42-day qualifying period). Additional content was added to the plan as it became available (e.g. for longer apprenticeships and where options were decided after the programme began).

• Evidence that progress is being made towards the agreed training plan (see off-the-job training section regarding the nature of this evidence). The employer has:

• Confirmed, as part of the signed plan, that they will allow the apprentice to complete the apprenticeship within their normal working hours, including any standalone English and maths qualifications required.

position; for each individual apprentice, the employer must attend, physically or virtually, in the majority of occurrences.

97.2.2 In all cases, whether the employer attends or not, a summary of the discussion must be shared with all parties. This summary must be signed, as a minimum, by the provider and the apprentice.

97.3. The progress review has a different purpose to the required check every 3 calendar months associated with learning support funding (see paragraph 40.5). The two discussions can be combined (where appropriate) but where this happens, there must be evidence of both discussions.

98. The provider must ensure that the progress review:

98.1. Checks progress against any actions agreed at the previous review, including any training that has been delivered since the last review;

98.2. Allows for any evidence of training, particularly that which is outside of the provider’s control, to be discussed, agreed, documented or collected;

98.3. Checks overall progress of the apprentice against their agreed training plan, and that any slippage against the volume of planned off-the-job training is documented;

98.4. Provides for an opportunity to update the training plan;

98.4.1 We only expect the training plan to be agreed and re-signed by the employer where a) new content is added or removed, b) the planned learning end date has changed; or c) any re-planned off-the-job training (that was missed or not delivered) has a key impact on the hours which employers need to release learners for in future.

98.4.2 Changes to the training plan that fall outside of the examples above do not need an employer signature.

98.5. Allows for any concerns and /or new information (e.g. changes of circumstance) to be discussed. This could include any additional relevant prior learning, learning difficulties or disability concerns, or learning support needs, that have become known since the original initial assessment. Changes to the training plan may require the price to be renegotiated; and

98.6. Agrees and documents actions for the next review.

Evidence requirements

• The provider is undertaking and documenting progress reviews in accordance with paragraphs 97 to 98 and that the agreed outcome or actions of these reviews are shared with the employer and the apprentice and retained as part of the evidence pack. Where the employer is not able to attend, there must be evidence that they were given the opportunity to contribute to the review.

What can be funded

Overview

99. The provider must ensure that funds from an employer’s apprenticeship service account or government-employer co-investment are only used for eligible costs related to the individual apprenticeship, up to the funding band maximum.

99.1. Eligible costs for training and on-programme assessment are agreed by the provider and the employer and are included, by the provider, in field TNP1 (on the ILR).

99.2. Eligible costs for end-point assessment are agreed by the provider and employer for integrated standards and by the provider (or employer) and the end-point assessment organisation for non-integrated standards. This is included by the provider in field TNP2 (on the ILR), but only when the cost is known; estimate costs must not be entered.

Eligible costs – training and on-programme assessment (TNP1)

100. For providers delivering training and on-programme assessment (field TNP1), eligible costs are limited to the following:

100.1. Initial assessment:

100.1.1 Initial assessment to confirm learner and programme eligibility.

100.1.2 Administration related to the subsequent enrolment (onboarding) of the apprentice. This can include the collection of evidence to support the initial assessment, supporting the employer with their apprenticeship service account and completing the apprenticeship agreement; and developing and agreeing the training plan with the employer and apprentice.

New for 1 August 2025

99.2 Clarification: We have made it clear that in the case of integrated standards the responsibility for setting EPA costs is with the provider. In the case of non-integrated standards the responsibility for setting EPA costs is with the EPAO and the provider role is to agree these costs.

100.2. Off-the-job training (that meets the definition in paragraphs 77 to 78):

100.2.1 Relevant tutor costs (salary, on-costs, travel and subsistence claims). By on-costs we mean employer pension contributions and national insurance. Travel and subsistence costs must relate to apprenticeship delivery.

100.2.2 Necessary delivery location costs (room hire or a proportionate contribution to the necessary facilities and overheads (i.e. water, electricity, gas), that enable the delivery of the documented off-the-job training to take place).

100.2.3 Learning materials used in the delivery of the apprenticeship (e.g. printed, audio / visual and electronic / interactive materials), including any relevant software licences to access these materials where the licence cost is at apprentice level. Learning materials can be developed in-house or bought from a third party and can be refreshed periodically (e.g. to respond to revisions in the standard, learner and employer feedback).

100.2.4 All training associated with a mandatory qualification. These qualifications comply with the mandatory qualifications policy and so will be fully funded; by this we mean we will fund all training content plus any peripheral costs, such as registration, on-programme assessment, examination and certification.

100.2.5 Relevant training associated with a non-mandatory qualification. For these qualifications we will only fund relevant training, where there is a clear overlap between the qualification content and the knowledge, skills and behaviours needed for the apprenticeship; we will not fund training that is not relevant to the standard, or the registration, on-programme assessment, examination, or certification costs.

100.2.6 Costs of an employer supporting or mentoring an apprentice, where this is required by the standard and part of the agreed training plan; by this we mean the delivery of knowledge, skills and behaviours linked to the apprenticeship. The direct link must be documented as part of the off-the-job training evidence. (Note: to receive apprenticeship funding, the employer must be on the Apprenticeship Provider and

Assessment Register (unless the exemptions at paragraphs

231.3 to 231.5 apply)).

100.2.7 Additional learning required to re-sit an exam linked to either a mandatory qualification or an end-point assessment.

100.2.8 Costs of an apprentice taking part in any skills competition if the employer and provider have agreed that participation in the competition directly contributes to helping that individual achieve the apprenticeship.

100.3. Materials and consumables:

100.3.1 Necessary physical materials (non-capital items) used in the delivery of the apprenticeship. By this we mean the equipment or supplies necessary to enable a particular learning activity to happen (e.g. perishable ingredients for a catering apprenticeship). These items would not normally have a lifespan beyond the individual apprenticeship being funded. Personal protective equipment that is exclusively used in the off-the-job training environment can also be included.

100.4. Peripheral costs including assessment:

100.4.1 Progress reviews involving the provider, employer and apprentice to collectively discuss progress to date of the apprentice against the training plan and the immediate next steps required.

100.4.2 Peripheral costs associated with a mandatory qualification. These include registration, formative on-programme assessment costs, examination and certification costs, plus the cost of one re-sit (per mandatory qualification) where needed.

100.5. Programme governance, management and administration (directly linked to training and assessment, including the end-point assessment):

100.5.1 The costs relating to lesson planning, quality assurance and the management of subcontractors.

100.5.2 Proportionate salary and on-costs of staff who are directly involved in the programme governance, management and administration of the apprenticeship.

100.5.3 Administration costs of arranging the end-point assessment.

100.5.4 The costs of collecting and reporting employer co-investment.

100.5.5 The costs of using an apprenticeship software system to return management information (e.g. salary and on-costs of management information staff and the software licences to operate the MI system).

100.5.6 For the nursing associate apprenticeship only, the costs of hosting an external placement. Note that hosting fees are separate from the delivery costs of training and on-programme assessment during a placement (see paragraph 103).

101. The majority of main providers will operate on commercial terms and will expect to create a surplus (profit); a surplus ensures the financial viability of a business and can provide funds for example to fund ineligible costs, improve facilities and services and remain competitive. This is a legitimate approach to take. A surplus (profit) can be made on eligible costs, except for:

101.1. Items that are procured from external sources. For example, if £500 of materials are bought to be used in the delivery of training (e.g. perishable ingredients for catering apprenticeships), additional profit must not be charged on the £500 price of these materials to the employer.

101.2. Delivery that is procured from a subcontractor. Note that this only relates to the specific fees charged by that subcontractor; a provider can still cover the costs of managing the subcontractor under the eligible cost of ‘Programme governance, management and administration’.

102. Providers and employers who are able to access apprenticeship funding, can only claim actual costs and must not make a profit from apprenticeship delivery to their own staff or those of a connected company or charity.

103. Any of the eligible costs outlined in paragraph 100 can be bought in by the provider from a third party, including the apprentice’s employer and we will fund them.

103.1. Where the provider buys in the delivery of apprenticeship training and /or on-programme assessment from a third party (including the apprentice’s employer) this is subcontracting and the provider must follow the subcontracting rules in paragraphs 221 to 258.

103.2. Funds from an employer’s apprenticeship service account or government co-investment must not be used to fund other services (not listed above).

Ineligible costs – training and on-programme assessment (TNP1)

104. For providers in the delivery of training and on-programme assessment, ineligible costs include the following:

104.1. Specific services / costs not related to the delivery and administration of the apprenticeship (typical ‘provider’ costs):

104.1.1 Lead generation activities (learner and employer recruitment). This includes marketing and promotion activities, the use of internal sales teams or external referral services (e.g. brokers, consultants); and the costs paid to employers, or their representatives, associated with procurement registers or other opportunities to secure business (e.g. memberships).

104.1.2 First-contact activity / light touch pre-screening activity that may take place prior to a full initial assessment. This includes information, advice and guidance delivery to individuals deemed not suitable for an apprenticeship.

104.1.3 The recruitment (including DBS checks) and continuing professional development of provider staff.

104.1.4 Development of original teaching materials related to a new apprenticeship offer. By this we mean the first time a provider chooses to deliver a new apprenticeship standard.

104.1.5 Provider / subcontractor induction activities. This may include outlining behaviour expectations and issuing the apprentice with any workbooks, contact details, logins and passwords.

Evidence requirements

• The provider has broken down the total negotiated price associated with the delivery of training and on-programme assessment (TNP1), and agreed with the employer, against the 5 key headings of the eligible costs section (listed in paragraph 100). Only eligible costs have been included. They can do this within the contract for services where appropriate.

• The provider has entered the agreed price for end-point assessment (if known) in TNP2 on the ILR and has not used an estimate.

104.1.6 Student support services, graduation ceremonies and celebration events.

104.1.7 Wider business costs. This includes insurance, rent / rates, utilities (water, electricity, gas), building maintenance, phone systems, library service.

104.1.8 The cost of non-apprenticeship personnel (e.g. finance, HR, procurement), where these costs are not directly attributable to the apprenticeship.

104.2. Specific services / costs not related to the delivery and administration of the apprenticeship (typical ‘employer’ costs):

104.2.1 Apprentice wages / benefits (including wages / costs of backfill arrangements).

104.2.2 Apprentice travel and subsistence costs (including travel to off-the-job training).

104.2.3 All accommodation costs associated with off-the-job training, including outward-bound activities.

104.2.4 Personal protective clothing / uniforms and safety equipment required by the apprentice to carry out their day-to-day work.

104.2.5 The recruitment (including DBS checks) and continuing professional development of employer staff involved in apprenticeships.

104.2.6 Employer induction activities for the apprentice.

104.2.7 Flexi-job apprenticeship agency fees.

104.2.8 Student membership fees that are required by professional bodies, even where linked to a mandatory qualification.

104.2.9 Any fees to awarding bodies for non-mandatory qualifications (qualifications that are not specifically listed in the standard). This includes registration, examination, certification and re-sit costs.

104.2.10 Additional learning required to re-sit an exam linked to a non-mandatory qualification.

104.2.11 Re-sit costs for a mandatory qualification, beyond the first re-sit (which is eligible).

104.2.12 Re-sit costs for any non-mandatory qualification.

104.2.13 Any training (e.g. optional modules, educational trips, industry visits, expert speakers or trips to professional events), in excess of that required to pass the end-point assessment and achieve the apprenticeship.

104.2.14 Time spent by employees / managers supporting or mentoring apprentices, where this is not delivering training required as part of the apprenticeship (i.e. generic line management responsibilities).

104.2.15 The creation of line manager resources.

104.3. Cost of assessing overseas qualifications (e.g. UK ENIC).

104.4. English and maths up to level 2; these are funded separately and must not be included in the TNP1 price.

104.5. Learning support:

104.5.1 The costs associated with any further detailed assessment for learning support (see paragraphs 36 to 42).

104.5.2 Learning support payments; these are funded separately and must not be included in the TNP1 price.

104.6. Repeating the same regulated qualification where the apprentice has previously achieved it:

104.6.1 Unless it is a requirement of the apprenticeship or for any GCSE where the apprentice has not achieved grade C, or 4, or higher.

104.7. Examinations and other testing, such as on-programme assessments (linked to a qualification) and mock testing (relating to the end-point assessment).

104.8. End-point assessment costs incurred by the provider, including invigilation:

104.8.1 All costs related to the end-point assessment (except for the administration of arranging the assessment) must be included in the price negotiated between the provider (or employer) and the end-point assessment organisation (TNP2 field on ILR) and not included in the cost of training (TNP1 field on ILR).

104.9. Capital:

104.9.1 Capital purchases including lease agreements. Capital purchases are long-term assets that would have a lifespan beyond the apprenticeship being funded, such as land, buildings, machinery and ICT equipment (e.g. tablets and similar electronic devices and the purchase / set-up costs of an MI / e-portfolio system).

104.9.2 Maintenance of capital purchases and component parts. This includes machinery / vehicle parts and labour, insurance and servicing / MOT.

104.9.3 Depreciation.

104.10. Financial inducements:

104.10.1 Financial inducements, or any other payment not authorised by us, must not be paid to an apprentice, employer, another training provider or to an end-point assessment organisation in relation to any part of the apprenticeship. This includes bonus payments to apprentices or employers for starting or completing an apprenticeship. Where an employer tenders for apprenticeship provision, training extras in excess of the apprenticeship requirements must not be included in the price.

104.10.2 Providers and subcontractors must not seek or accept financial inducements in relation to the apprenticeship.

105. The ineligible costs listed above must not be included by the provider in the price that they agree with the employer.

105.1. If the provider (main provider) chooses to use the profit (surplus) that a commercial provider can legitimately earn from eligible costs, on any of these activities, they can choose to do so.

Evidence requirements

• The provider has not included any ineligible cost (listed in paragraph 104) in the total negotiated price associated with the delivery of training and on-programme assessment (TNP1), as agreed with the employer.

Additional payments for employers, providers and care leaver apprentices

Eligibility criteria

106. The provider and the employer will receive an additional £1,000 payment towards the additional cost associated with training if, at the start of the apprenticeship training, the apprentice is:

106.1. Aged between 16 and 18 years old (or 15 years of age if the apprentice’s 16th birthday is between the last Friday of June and 31 August); or

106.2. Aged between 19 and 24 years old and has either an Education, Health and Care (EHC) plan provided by their local authority and /or has been, or are, in the care of their local authority as defined in paragraph 108.2.

New for 1 August 2025

108 Clarification: To confirm the age range includes those apprentices whose 16th birthday is between the last Friday of June and 31 August, and that eligibility includes those who are still in care.

108.4 Clarification: Confirmation of the process to follow if the care leaver bursary entitlement is not recorded in time.

108.5 Clarification: To confirm that the care leavers’ bursary is tax free and not treated as income for Universal Credit calculations.

109.2.1 Policy update: Confirmation of when the final additional payment will be paid for those apprenticeship standards who have a published typical duration of less than 12 months, and for foundation apprenticeships.

110.3.1 Policy update: Confirmation of when the final care leavers’ bursary payment will be paid for those apprenticeship standards who have a published typical duration of less than 12 months, and for foundation apprenticeships.

111.1 Clarification: Updated to reflect what happens when an apprentice completes their apprenticeship early. Evidence Requirements: Updated to reflect that confirmation of the care leaver status from the local authority does not require a particular format, and that within their signed declaration the apprentice confirms that they have not previously received this care leavers’ bursary.

107. Employer-providers can receive both employer and provider payments if the apprentice meets the eligibility criteria.

108. The provider must provide all 16–24-year-old apprentices (or 15 years of age if the apprentice’s 16th birthday is between the last Friday of June and 31 August) the opportunity to declare their eligibility for the care leavers’ bursary. This should be done before or when the apprenticeship starts so that the payments can support the apprentice as soon as possible.

108.1. Apprentices are eligible to receive a £3,000 bursary if they are, or have been in the care of a UK local authority as defined below (nb: if the apprentice has had the support of a Local Authority leaving care personal advisor, it is likely that they will meet this criteria).

108.2. A child in care is defined as:

108.2.1 An eligible child – a young person who is 16 or 17 and who has been looked after by a UK local authority / health and social care trust for at least a period of 13 weeks since the age of 14 and who is still looked after;

108.2.2 A relevant child – a young person who is 16 or 17 who has left care within the UK after their 16th birthday and before leaving care was an eligible child; or

108.2.3 A former relevant child – a young person who is under the age of 25 who, before turning 18, was either an eligible or a relevant child.

108.3. Where the apprentice is aged between 19 and 24 years old, at the start of their apprenticeship training (see paragraph 106.2), providers must obtain consent from the apprentice to inform their employer that they have an EHC plan or that they have been, or are, in the care of their local authority.

108.3.1 Where an apprentice does not want to inform their employer that they have an EHC plan or that they have been, or are, in care this must be reported in the ILR. This will generate the funding for the provider but not the employer. Where the apprentice is aged between 22 and 24 years-old providers must not apply or record the co-investment waiver (see paragraph 183.2) in the ILR.

108.4. If eligibility for the bursary is not recorded in the ILR during the academic year that the 60 day payment would be due (see paragraph

110), and the apprentice is still on-programme, then please refer to the Apprenticeship Technical Funding Guide on how to claim this bursary.

108.5. The care leavers’ bursary is tax free and not treated as income in Universal Credit calculations. This payment is to acknowledge the additional financial burden that these learners encounter when living in, or leaving, care. Payment of claims

109. The provider and employer additional payments will be generated, (and paid via the provider) as follows:

109.1. 90 days after the apprentice’s learning start date, 50% will be paid if the apprentice is still undertaking their apprenticeship; and

109.2. 365 days after the apprentice’s learning start date, the remaining 50% will be paid if the apprentice is still undertaking their apprenticeship.

109.2.1 Where the apprentice is on a shorter apprenticeship (where the published typical duration of the apprenticeship standard is less than 12 months), or on a foundation apprenticeship, this payment will be generated 242 days after the apprentice’s learning start date instead. (Note: if the apprentice is on an apprenticeship standard where the published typical duration is 12 months or more, but they complete their apprenticeship in less than 12 months, then this final instalment will not be made).

109.3. Where a break in learning occurs, please refer to paragraph 278.2.

110. The care leavers’ bursary payment, due to the apprentice, will be generated (and paid via the provider) as follows:

110.1. 60 days after the apprentice’s learning start date, £1,000 will be paid if the apprentice is still undertaking their apprenticeship;

110.2. 120 days after the apprentice’s learning start date, £1,000 will be paid if the apprentice is still undertaking their apprenticeship; and

110.3. 300 days after the apprentice’s learning start date, £1,000 will be paid if the apprentice is still undertaking their apprenticeship.

110.3.1 Where the apprentice is on a shorter apprenticeship (where the published typical duration of the apprenticeship standard is less than 12 months), or on a foundation apprenticeship, this payment will be generated 242 days after the

apprentice’s learning start date instead. (Note: if the apprentice is on an apprenticeship standard where the published typical duration is 12 months or more, but they complete their apprenticeship prior to day 300, then this final instalment will not be made – however, please refer to paragraph 111.1 for instances where the apprentice goes on to undertake another apprenticeship).

110.4. Where a change in circumstances or a break in learning occurs, please refer to paragraphs 111.1 and 278.3.

111. The care leavers’ bursary is a one-off claim. An eligible apprentice must only receive the bursary once.

111.1. Where an apprentice, who is eligible to receive a bursary of £3,000, leaves, or completes, their apprenticeship before receiving the full bursary, they will still be entitled to further payments on a new apprenticeship until they have received £3,000 in total.

112. The provider must pass the payments on, in full, to the employer and /or apprentice within 30 working days of receiving the funding from us. Where an apprentice is employed by a Flexi-Job Apprenticeship Agency (FJAA), any applicable employer additional payment must be paid to the FJAA.

113. Where the provider has been unable to pass the additional payment onto the employer (for example, the employer has not responded to numerous requests for their bank details) then this payment must be returned to us. On the Earnings Adjustment Statement (EAS) the provider will need to enter the payment as a negative Authorised Claim. The adjustment type would be "Authorised Claims - Additional payments for employer". Information can be found in the EAS Guidance.

Evidence requirements

• Before any payment is claimed for and paid there is confirmation of eligibility for any additional payment and /or care leaver bursary. This includes (1) confirmation of age; (2) a signed letter or email confirmation from a local authority confirming the individual’s care leaver status (this does not require a particular format); or (3) evidence of an education, health and care (EHC) plan where the apprentice is aged between 19 and 24 years old (Local Authority confirmation does not require a particular format; main providers should assist the apprentice in obtaining confirmation where necessary).

• For the care leavers bursary, a signed declaration by the apprentice to confirm that they: (1) understand that they are eligible for and would like to receive a bursary as a care leaver; (2) have not previously received the care leavers bursary (noting paragraph 111.1); and (3) when claiming the employer additional payment, signed consent from the apprentice that they have provided permission to share their care leaver status (or EHC plan) with their employer on their behalf.

• Evidence of payment being paid to the employer (additional payments) and /or apprentice (care leaver bursary) within the agreed timeframe:

͂ For the employer additional payment this must be evidenced within the provider’s financial systems (to show transaction of payment) and must include confirmation, to the employer, that this payment has been sent. (Note: we do not require the employer to invoice the provider for this payment). Where the provider has been unable to pass this payment to the employer, the provider must evidence the attempts they have made and confirm that the payment has been returned to us.

͂ For the care leaver bursary this must be evidenced within the provider’s financial systems (to show transaction of payment) and must include confirmation from the apprentice, that each payment has been received.

End-point assessments

114. The main provider (in consultation with the employer) must ensure that the apprentice is prepared for and understands the end-point assessment process.

115. Engagement of the end-point assessment organisation (EPAO) can be at any time in the apprenticeship. However, at least 6 months before the apprentice reaches gateway, the main provider (or the employer if they have chosen to undertake this role) must:

115.1. Select an organisation to deliver the end-point assessment;

115.2. Negotiate a price with the EPAO.

115.2.1 The cost of the end-point assessment will vary between standards and we expect providers (or employers if they have chosen to undertake this role) to negotiate with assessment organisations to secure value for money. The cost of the end-point assessment should not exceed 20% of the funding band maximum.

115.2.2 If the overall price of the apprenticeship is more than the funding band maximum for the standard, then the employer must pay in full the difference between the band maximum and the total negotiated price.

116. The employer and provider must ensure that the price agreed for the end-point assessment, or costs claimed for the apprenticeship includes the amount that has been negotiated with the EPAO.

New for 1 August 2025 Policy update: In February 2025, the Government announced reforms to apprenticeship assessment and published a new set of assessment principles. These changes will apply to all apprenticeships, at all levels. Existing assessment plans will be rewritten on a standard -by- standard basis to reflect these changes, starting from April 2025 Updates to reflect the reforms to apprenticeship assessment are provided separately at Annex B. Policy update: We have removed reference to the entire duration of the apprenticeship standard being a minimum of 372 days to be eligible for funding.

117. The provider must contract with the EPAO and lead the relationship with them, including where the delivery of apprenticeship training is subcontracted. This allows the provider to make payment to the end-point assessment organisation conducting the end-point assessment.

117.1. Once a contractual agreement is in place, the provider must record the selected EPAO in the Individualised Learner Record (ILR) for every apprentice.

118. The written agreement between the provider and the EPAO must include the following:

118.1. The arrangements for sharing relevant information about the apprentice to ensure end-point assessment and certification can take place. This information must be presented to the EPAO when it is due.

118.2. Arrangements for any re-takes and payments;

118.3. Arrangements for a change of circumstances, which may delay, or lead to the cancellation of, the end-point assessment.

119. An apprentice can only take their end-point assessment after:

119.1. They have met the minimum duration of the apprenticeship (see paragraph 73).

119.2. They have satisfied the gateway requirements set out in its assessment plan (including any specific duration criteria); and

119.3. Their employer (in consultation with the main provider) is content they have attained sufficient skills, knowledge and behaviours to successfully complete the apprenticeship.

120. The apprentice must be employed until the end-point assessment is completed. Consideration must be given to the potential time needed for any re-sit and /or re-training prior to re-taking the end-point assessment so the apprentice remains employed during this time.

120.1. The only exception is where the apprentice has been made redundant and we are funding the apprenticeship to completion. In this case, any main provider responsible for the completion of the training can act as a proxy employer for the purposes of providing any required employer competency statement. This does not mean the main provider records themselves as the employer in the ILR.

120.2. Where an apprentice has changed employer after they have completed all the training and reached gateway, including where the new job role is not

related to the apprenticeship, the apprentice may complete the end-point assessment in agreement with the end-point assessment organisation and the provider, so long as the end-point assessment can be successfully delivered and funded.

120.2.1 Providers must contact apprenticeship service support to get approval to report this change to us and to receive the technical details for claiming the completion payment.

121. Once assessment has started, any change of EPAO must be agreed, with both the employer and provider providing the satisfactory withdrawal from the original end-point assessment organisation as per the contractual agreement. The employer (or provider in agreement with the employer) may choose to re-negotiate the price of the end-point assessment with the new EPAO. However, if the overall price is more than the maximum funding band for the standard, then the employer must pay in full the difference between the band maximum and the total negotiated price.

122. Although both the employer and the main provider will be involved in administrative arrangements for assessment, the end point assessment itself must be independent (subject to paragraph 125 below). Some assessment plans give the employer and the provider specific roles but, except for integrated standards, training providers who have delivered the training cannot assess their own learners.

123. The EPAO, and the awarding body in the case of mandatory qualifications, must ensure that the assessment methods, involve someone from the occupation in the delivery and grading decision who has not been involved in the training element of the apprenticeship.

124. Where an apprentice wishes to move to a standard with a revised assessment plan, providers must follow the ‘Changing to a new version of a standard’ rules (see paragraphs 294 to 308). End-point assessment process for integrated standards

125. The end-point assessment organisation for an integrated degree standard may be a higher education training provider or a professional body. If the training provider is also acting as the EPAO for an integrated degree, in order to remain independent, the assessment must involve someone from the occupation in the delivery and grading decision who has not been involved in the training element of the apprenticeship.

125.1. Validation arrangements for integrated degrees may be considered and assessed within external quality assurance processes.

125.2. For HEIs based outside of England, the provider will be granted access to the APAR in the usual manner for the purposes of providing training. For the purpose of the EPA for integrated degrees, Skills England will be responsible for ensuring External Quality Assurance arrangements are in place.

126. Delivery of new learning must not take place during the end-point assessment period. Certification

127. The end-point assessment organisation (or the provider, in the case of an integrated standard) is responsible for claiming the apprenticeship completion certificate from us (including for those apprentices who are not funded by us and recorded in the ILR under Funding Model 99).

128. The end-point assessment organisation must not claim the apprenticeship completion certificate from us until they have received evidence from the provider that the apprentice has met all the requirements of the apprenticeship including English and /or maths where applicable.

129. Where applicable the provider must apply for, and give, apprentice’s certificates from awarding organisations for achieving a mandatory qualification, and ensure they keep a copy of this in the evidence pack.

Evidence requirements The provider must have:

• Evidence of the written agreement with, and payments made to, the EPAO for conducting the end-point assessment where appropriate.

• Records and evidence of completion of the end-point assessment. This must be available within 3 months of providers reporting it in the ILR. Evidence of completion would include:

͂ Signed statement by employer and provider that the apprentice is still employed until the end-point assessment is completed;

͂ Evidence from the EPAO that the EPA has been attempted and either a) achieved and the certificate claimed (this could include a screenshot from the EPAO portal); or b) failed (and no resit taken).

Foundation apprenticeships

Overview

130. This section covers those aspects of the foundation apprenticeship programme that differ from other apprenticeship programmes. For elements not covered in this section, please refer to the relevant sections throughout this document.

131. Foundation apprenticeships have their own occupational standards; details of these can be found on Skills England’s website.

Learner eligibility

132. In order to access funds in the employer’s apprenticeship service account or government-employer co-investment, the provider must ensure that at the start of their foundation apprenticeship training, the apprentice is:

132.1. Aged between 16 and 21 years old (or 15 years of age if the apprentice’s birthday is between the last Friday of June and 31 August); or

132.2. Aged between 22 and 24 years old and has either an Education, Health and Care (EHC) plan provided by their local authority and /or has been, or are, in the care of their location authority as defined in paragraph 108.2; or

132.3. Aged between 22 and 24 years old and is either a prisoner (see paragraph 69.4) or is a prison leaver.

133. For apprentices aged between 22 and 24 years old, providers must ensure that the apprentice is informed that their employer will be made aware that they either:

133.1. have an Education, Health and Care (EHC) plan; or

133.2. have been, or are, in the care of their local authority; or

New for 1 August 2025 This is a new section that has been added to the funding rules following the launch of foundation apprenticeships. The rules in this section only cover those aspects that differ from other apprenticeships (i.e. from non-foundation apprenticeships). All other rules and evidence requirements within this document still apply in order for the apprentice and foundation apprenticeship to be eligible for funding. Please see Annex B for the funding rules that apply to the assessment of foundation apprenticeships.

133.3. are a prisoner or have been in prison

134. Where apprentices do not give consent to share this information with their employer, then they must not be placed on a foundation apprenticeship. Providers should look at other apprenticeships (i.e. a non-foundation apprenticeship) which enables this information to remain confidential.

135. All other eligibility criteria for apprentices can be found within paragraphs 25 to

29. Programme eligibility

136. When undertaking the initial assessment, providers must ensure that a foundation apprenticeship is the most suitable apprenticeship programme for the learner (taking into account any recognition of prior learning).

137. We will fund an apprentice to undertake a foundation apprenticeship at the same or lower level than a qualification they already hold, if the foundation apprenticeship will allow the individual to acquire significant new knowledge, skills and behaviours, the provider can show that the content of the training is materially different from any prior qualification or previous apprenticeship and that the minimum duration can still be met once prior learning has been recognised.

Support for English and maths training

138. Where the apprentice is aged 16-18 and does not already hold a level 2 qualification in English and /or maths, then the provider must adopt the following approach and can claim funding in the following scenarios:

138.1. Where the apprentice holds neither level 1 (Functional Skills level 1 or GCSE D to G or 3 to 1) nor level 2 (Functional Skills level 2 or GCSE A* to C or 9 to 5), then the apprentice must start and continue to study for at least a level 1 English and /or maths (Functional Skills level 1 or GCSE grade 3 to 1).

138.2. Where the apprentices already holds an approved level 1 qualification, then the apprentice must start and continue to study for a level 2 English and /or maths (Functional Skills level 2 and GCSE grade 9 to 4).

138.3. Under both scenarios the apprentice is not required to take the assessment(s) prior to completing their foundation apprenticeship, however where providers deem it appropriate (for example, the apprentice is ready to take and pass the test) the assessment(s) can be taken.

139. Where the apprentice is age 19-24, please refer to paragraph 46.

140. Where it is agreed that the apprentice will study towards English and /or maths, providers must ensure active learning for English and /or maths takes place in line with the signed training plan. Where the apprentice is aged 16-18 the plan must include a minimum of 55 guided learning hours per subject (this is in addition to the hours required for off-the-job training).

140.1. The only exception to this is where it has been identified, within the initial assessment, that due to prior knowledge the learner requires less than 55 guided learning hours in order to be ready to take and pass the assessment(s) (see paragraph 138.3) – in these instances this must be documented on their training plan.

Additional payments

141. For eligible apprentices, the provider and the employer will receive an additional £1,000 payment towards the additional cost associated with training – see paragraphs 106 and 109 for eligibility and payment dates.

142. Eligible apprentices will also receive the care leavers’ bursary – see paragraphs

108 and 110 for eligibility and payment dates.

143. Where a foundation apprenticeship attracts an employer incentive (as identified within the standard on the Skills England website), payments will be generated (and paid via the provider) as follows:

143.1. 90 days after the apprentice’s learning start date, £667 will be paid if the apprentice is still undertaking their foundation apprenticeship;

143.2. 242 days after the apprentice’s learning start date, £667 will be paid if the apprentice is still undertaking their foundation apprenticeship

143.3. A progression payment of £666 will be paid if the apprentice, upon completion of their foundation apprenticeship:

143.3.1 starts a new apprenticeship (which is not a foundation apprenticeship) within 6 months of their completion date; and

143.3.2 remains with the same employer (i.e. stays on the same employers AS account)

143.3.3 This payment will be made 90 days after the apprentice’s learning start date (on their new apprenticeship), if they are still undertaking that apprenticeship

143.4. Where an apprentice has a break in learning, please refer to paragraphs

278.2 to 278.3 to see how this will impact these payment dates.

144. The provider must pass the payments on, in full, to the employer within 30 working days of receiving the funding from us. Where a foundation apprentice is employed by a Flexi-Job Apprenticeship Agency (FJAA), these payments must be paid to the FJAA.

145. Where there is a change of employer, or change of circumstances, please refer to paragraphs 147 to 158 to see how this impacts the incentive payments. Change in circumstance

146. Where a 16–17-year-old apprentice is at risk of becoming a NEET (not in education, employment or training), providers must:

146.1. Offer IAG support to any apprentice who is at risk of withdrawing from their foundation apprenticeship earlier or who is at risk of not remaining in employment following completion of their programme.

146.1.1 This also includes both education and local employment opportunities.

146.2. Comply with their statutory duty to notify the relevant local authority of any 16-17-year-old who is no longer participating in training and is at risk of becoming NEET (this will enable them to access the local authority support systems). Actions to take where the apprentice changes employer but continues the same foundation apprenticeship with the same provider

147. Additional payments and incentive payments stop for the first employer, but they will retain any eligible payments already made. The number of days in learning with the first employer are added to the days in learning with the new employer to calculate when subsequent payments are due.

148. Any employer co-investment due from the first employer must be reconciled by the provider, with any overpayment, or underpayment, of co-investment being addressed. Actions to take where the apprentice withdraws from the foundation apprenticeship (not via redundancy) prior to completion

149. Additional payments and incentive payments stop for the employer and provider, but they will retain any eligible payments already made.

150. Any employer co-investment due from the employer must be reconciled by the provider, with any overpayment, or underpayment, of co-investment being addressed.

151. The provider must issue the apprentice with a ‘summary of training’ document which evidences the training that the apprentice has undertaken to the point of withdrawal. See evidence requirements for what information needs to be captured in this document. Actions to take where the employer selects a different provider but the foundation apprenticeship remains the same

152. The original provider will retain any eligible provider additional payments already made. Any remaining provider additional payments not paid to the original provider can be paid to the new provider. The number of days in learning with the original provider are added to the days in learning with the new provider to calculate when subsequent payments are due.

153. Any employer co-investment due from the employer, for the period of training delivered, must be reconciled by the original main provider. Any overpayment, or underpayment, of co-investment must be addressed.

154. The original provider must issue the employer with a ‘summary of training’ document which evidences the training that the apprentice has undertaken to the point of changing providers. See evidence requirements for what information needs to be captured in this document. Actions to take where the apprentice moves to a different apprenticeship programme prior to completing their foundation apprenticeship

155. Additional payments and incentive payments stop for the employer and provider, but they will retain any eligible payments already made.

156. The provider must issue the apprentice and /or employer with a ‘summary of training’ document which evidences the training that the apprentice has undertaken to the point of withdrawal. See evidence requirements for what information needs to be captured in this document.

157. Any employer co-investment due from the employer, for the period of training delivered for the original foundation apprenticeship, must be reconciled by the provider. Any overpayment, or underpayment, of co-investment must be addressed.

158. Eligibility for employer incentive payments (see paragraph 143) and /or additional payments (see paragraphs 141 to 142) will be determined by the apprentice’s age at the start of their next apprenticeship (noting that employer incentive payments are only for foundation apprenticeships).

Evidence requirements Providers must refer to each section of the funding rules, which provide full details of the evidence requirements. This section highlights the extra evidence requirements that are necessary for claiming funding for foundation apprenticeships. The provider must retain evidence of an individual’s eligibility, including:

• Confirmation that the learner is eligible for funding for a foundation apprenticeship: o confirmation of the apprentice’s date of birth o evidence of an Education, Health and Care (EHC) plan, where applicable o a signed letter or email confirmation from a local authority confirming the individual’s care leaver status, where applicable o plus a signed declaration by the apprentice to confirm that they: (1) understand that they are eligible for and would like to receive a bursary as a care leaver; (2) have not previously received the care leavers bursary (noting paragraph 111.1); and (3) when claiming the employer additional payment, signed consent from the apprentice that they have provided permission to share their care leaver status (or EHC plan) with their employer on their behalf. o for prisoners, confirmation from the employer that a completed and signed Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) is in place o for prison leavers, a self-declaration from the apprentice The provider must confirm, after completing the initial assessment, that both the individual and the programme are eligible for funding and that a foundation apprenticeship is the right programme for the individual. For apprentices aged 16-18 who are undertaking English and /or maths, the provider must:

• detail the plans for English and /or maths active learning to take place in line with the signed training plan

• document the hours that have been delivered to ensure this meets the minimum number of hours Providers must retain evidence of additional payments and incentive payments being paid to the employer within the agreed timeframes:

• This must be evidenced within the provider’s financial systems (to show transaction of payment) and must include confirmation, to the employer, that

• This must be evidenced within the provider’s financial systems (to show transaction of payment) and must include confirmation, to the employer, that this payment has been sent. (Note: we do not require the employer to invoice the provider for this payment). Where the provider has been unable to pass this payment to the employer, the provider must evidence the attempts they have made and confirm that the payment has been returned to us.

• For the progression payment (where applicable), in addition to the above, evidence that the learner has remained with the same employer and started their next apprenticeship within 6 months of completing their foundation apprenticeship. For the care leaver bursary this must be evidenced within the provider’s financial systems (to show transaction of payment) and must include confirmation from the apprentice, that each payment has been received. Where an apprentice, aged 16-17-years old, is at risk of becoming a NEET, the provider must evidence they have offered IAG support and have complied with the statutory duty of notifying the relevant local authority. Where an apprentice withdraws before completion, moves onto a different apprenticeship programme or changes main providers whilst on-programme, the provider must evidence that they have issued a ‘summary of training’ document to the relevant party / parties. This document must confirm:

• details of the apprentice;

• details of the foundation apprenticeship (subject, start date and planned end date);

• percentage of the foundation apprenticeship that has been completed;

• a summary of the knowledge, skills and behaviours that the apprentice has developed and evidenced during their time on their foundation apprenticeship.

• in the case of the foundation apprenticeship having a mandatory qualification, then the details of the qualification, or units thereof, achieved

Paying for an apprenticeship

Funds in an employer’s apprenticeship service account

159. All new apprentice starts must be funded through the apprenticeship service. An employer who does not pay the levy can reserve funds using the apprenticeship service or receive a levy transfer to access apprenticeship funding.

160. Funding for an apprenticeship is determined by whether there are levy funds available in an employer’s apprenticeship service account each month. In any particular month:

160.1. If levy funds are available in an employer’s account, we will pay the provider 80% of the total negotiated price (TNP1 and TNP2) up to the funding band maximum, in equal monthly instalments according to the planned duration of the apprenticeship, regardless of how training is scheduled over the duration of the apprenticeship.

160.2. If the employer does not have levy funds in their apprenticeship account (non-levy payers and levy payers with insufficient funds), we will pay the provider 80% of the government co-investment funding in equal monthly instalments (up to the funding band maximum) according to the planned duration of the apprenticeship, regardless of how training is scheduled over the duration of the apprenticeship. Our monthly instalments will need to be matched with equivalent employer co-investment payments (set at the rate at the time the apprenticeship training started), with main providers evidencing this throughout the financial year.

161. We will pay the remaining balance (the completion payment) of the total negotiated price, up to the funding band maximum, to the provider when the apprentice has undertaken all the activity relevant to the apprenticeship, including completing all elements of the end-point assessment; and where applicable, the employer co-investment has been collected and recorded on the ILR (see paragraph 163).

New for 1 August 2025

163.2 Clarification: We have clarified that the cash value of the employer co-investment must be reported on the ILR by the main provider’s final ILR submission within the academic year that the apprentice completes.

162. Deductions from the employer’s apprenticeship service account will mirror these payments where funds are available.

163. Where apprenticeship training is not funded from an employer’s levy funds (i.e. non-levy payers and levy payers with insufficient funds), for main providers to be eligible for the completion payment (described in paragraph 161) they must have:

163.1. Collected the co-investment from the employer; and

163.2. Reported the cash value of the employer co-investment on the ILR, by their final ILR submission within the academic year that the apprentice completes.

Use of an employer’s apprenticeship service account

164. Employers must only add PAYE schemes for themselves or their connected companies or charities (according to HMRC’s definition) to their apprenticeship service account.

164.1. Public bodies cannot usually be connected for apprenticeship levy purposes. If an employer is a public body, they must only add the PAYE scheme or schemes for one employer, that is, a government department, local authority, or non-ministerial department.

164.2. There are some exceptions where public bodies are considered to be corporate bodies, companies, or charities. If an organisation is connected, as defined by HMRC employment allowance connection rules and shares one apprenticeship levy allowance, then an account could be set up with another connected employer.

165. We will monitor accounts to check that PAYE schemes are properly used. If we have any questions, we may ask employers to provide evidence that the employers sharing an apprenticeship service account are connected.

166. Employers must:

166.1. Remove PAYE schemes from their apprenticeship service account that are no longer operated by the employer associated with the account (or leaves the group of connected companies);

166.2. Manage users associated with their account including:

166.2.1 Ensuring that individuals who are employed, or acting on behalf of the provider, are not given access to the employer’s apprenticeship service account;

166.2.2 Controlling who can add users; and

166.2.3 Removing users who are not authorised to act on their behalf.

167. Employers can give the provider permission to enter the apprentice details (via their provider account) on their behalf. Employers will need to review and approve the apprentice details (entered by the provider) in order to release funding. Providers must not have access to an employer’s apprenticeship service account, unless operating as an employer-provider.

168. Employers must not allow any third party to authorise payments through their apprenticeship service account.

169. To be funded from the apprenticeship service account, the data entered into the apprenticeship service account must correspond with the information submitted by the provider to us each month through the ILR. Payments to the provider will only be made if these details match.

169.1. If we withhold payments to the provider because there is not a match, we will reconcile the payments due to the provider when the data matches and make the corresponding changes within the apprenticeship service account.

170. Employers are responsible for making accurate declarations to HMRC that we will use to manage their apprenticeship service account. If, as a result of retrospective changes to the amount of apprenticeship levy declared to HMRC, there is an overpayment by us to the provider, we may ask employers to pay us the employer co-investment value based on the rate in place when the apprenticeship training started - we will provide employers with details of this as required.

170.1. Where there would have been insufficient funds in the employer’s apprenticeship service account, we will take responsibility for these payments and the employer will be required to pay co-investment direct to us. If this happens, we will provide details of the co-investment value to providers, as this may be needed for accounting purposes.

171. Employers whose organisation is subject to structural changes, including mergers and acquisitions, must contact us to inform us of these changes.

Reservation of funds by non-levy employers

172. Employers, who do not pay the levy, can reserve funds using the apprenticeship service to access apprenticeship funding. More information on reservation of funds can be found in the guidance on GOV.UK.

173. Employers who are planning to use reserved funds to fund an apprentice, should reserve funds in advance of recruitment, or an offer of an apprenticeship being made to an existing employee. In cases where that is not possible, employers must reserve funds within one calendar month of the apprenticeship starting (i.e., the reservation can be backdated by one calendar month).

174. Reservations can only be used for:

174.1. New apprenticeship starts; and

174.2. Re-starts where the apprenticeship was previously funded via contracted provision and following redundancy, or provider failure, needs to be funded via a reservation to allow an apprentice to continue / complete their apprenticeship with a new employer.

175. Reserved funds are classed as government-employer co-investment and all rules associated with government-employer co-investment must be followed when using reserved funds; please see paragraphs 182 to 189.

176. Providers will need to agree the funding type prior to submitting their ILR, so that funds can be reserved (for a start or re-start).

177. Reservations will expire if they are not used within 3 months of the start date detailed within the reservation. If the reservation expires before the apprentice starts, the employer (or provider if they have been given permission) must make a new reservation.

178. If a change of circumstance occurs that results in the need for a new reservation on the apprenticeship service, the employer (or the provider) must contact apprenticeship service support.

The price of an apprenticeship

179. The provider must agree a contract for services with the employer and this must include a price for the total cost of each apprenticeship (including the cost of the end-point assessment).

New for 1 January 2026 – Version 3

180 Clarification: We have clarified that all TNP1 / TNP2 changes must be agreed with the employer and clearly documented.

179.1. Any savings from the recognition of prior learning or from further price negotiation (e.g. due to cohort size) must come from within the funding band.

179.2. It must be clear how much the employer will be expected to contribute (if applicable).

179.3. The agreed price that is entered into the ILR and the apprenticeship service must be the same. These prices must not include any VAT (although VAT may be charged on employer co-investment).

179.4. Where the details of the end-point assessment organisation are not known at the start of the apprenticeship, these must be entered (in TNP2) once they have been confirmed. This field in the ILR must be left blank until the price of the end-point assessment has been confirmed to ensure accuracy.

179.5. The funding bands and the standards placed within them, may be subject to change. Any change will only apply to new starts and not apply to apprentices already engaged on the apprenticeship.

180. Once the price has been agreed, any subsequent changes to either the TNP1 or the TNP2 price fields must be agreed by the employer and clearly documented.

180.1. We will monitor changes of price and patterns of behaviour to identify any fraudulent activity.

181. If the true cost of delivery exceeds the funding band maximum (before any deductions for prior learning have been made), the provider must agree off-line (outside of the ILR and apprenticeship service) how the employer will pay this difference. We do not need to know about the amount of this difference and VAT can be charged on this amount. This difference must not be funded from the apprenticeship service account or co-investment.

Evidence requirements

• There is a signed and dated contract for services between the provider and the employer, and this has been updated as required. This includes details of any price reduction / negotiation and any details of any employer contribution / co-investment.

• Where either the TNP1 or the TNP2 changes, the reason for this change and evidence that this change has been agreed in advance with the employer is clear.

Employer co-investment

182. Employers who do not pay the apprenticeship levy, and levy paying employers with insufficient funds, must co-invest the relevant amount of the total negotiated price, up to the funding band maximum, towards the cost of the apprenticeship training and assessment.

182.1. For apprenticeships that started on or after 1 April 2019, the employer co-investment rate is 5%. The government will pay the remaining percentage (up to the funding band maximum). Where the total negotiated price has exceeded the funding band maximum, the employer must pay all the additional costs above the funding band maximum in full.

183. The exemptions below apply to paragraph 182. In the circumstances below, the government will fund all of the apprenticeship training and assessment costs, up to the funding band maximum of the apprenticeship:

183.1. Employers who do not pay the levy, if at the start of their apprenticeship training the apprentice is aged between 16 and 21 years old (or 15 years of age if the apprentice’s 16th birthday is between the last Friday of June and 31 August).

183.2. Employers who do not pay the levy, if at the start of their apprenticeship training the apprentice is aged between 22 and 24 years old and has either an Education, Health and Care (EHC) plan provided by local authority and /or has been, or are, in the care of their local authority (please refer to paragraphs 108.2 and 108.3).

184. In the above scenarios, the provider must not request any employer contribution towards the costs of an apprenticeship, up to the funding band maximum.

184.1. However, if the total negotiated price is above the funding band maximum, then the employer is still liable to pay in full the difference between these values.

New for 1 August 2025

187 Clarification: Text updated to make it clearer what the impact is on new employers for cases where an apprenticeship started prior to 1 April 2024 and there is a subsequent change of employer.

189.4 Clarification: Confirmation that the full co-investment amount must be collected and recorded by the providers final ILR submission relating to the academic year that the apprentice completes in.

184.2. The provider must not request any employer contribution towards the cost of English and maths provision, learning support or additional payments.

184.3. Where an employer delivers to their own staff as an employer-provider, co-investment does not apply.

185. Where an employer is showing as a levy payer in their Apprenticeship Service account, but they haven’t declared / paid any apprenticeship levy within the last

2 years (from when the eligible apprentice starts), in order to waive the co-investment requirement the employer will need to contact the Apprenticeship Service Support Desk on 08000 150 600 or email helpdesk@manage-apprenticeships.service.gov.uk to update their AS Account.

185.1. Changes to levy / non-levy status will not be backdated, so only eligible starts from the date of change will qualify for the co-investment waiver.

186. Where an employer becomes a levy-payer during an apprenticeship, which started as a non-levy apprenticeship, levy funds available in the employer’s account will be used to pay that month’s instalment.

186.1. Please refer to the Apprenticeships Technical Funding guide for more information about when a change of circumstance affects the co-investment rate.

187. Where there is a change of employer, and the apprenticeship originally started prior to 1 April 2024, then the co-investment waiver will no longer apply meaning the new employer will be liable to pay co-investment (regardless of the apprentice’s age at the time (this also covers where an apprenticeship re-starts with a new employer)).

188. We will continue to make payments to main providers provided they record and evidence that they have collected the employer’s contribution. Main providers must not return, in total or in part, the employer’s contribution once the co-investment has been collected – the only exception is where a change of circumstances has taken place (for example, where an employer becomes a levy-payer during an apprenticeship which started as a non-levy apprenticeship, or the apprentice has changed employer or has withdrawn from the apprenticeship). In these instances, the employer co-investment must be reconciled and any overpayment addressed.

189. We may withhold the final completion payment until all the necessary employer co-investment has been collected.

189.1. Main providers must invoice employers separately for any employer co-investment, including any VAT if applicable.

189.2. Main providers may agree a schedule of co-investment payments with the employer which does not match monthly payments made by us, provided the employer has paid a matching co-investment payment.

189.3. Throughout the financial year main providers must regularly collect the matching co-investment from employers and report this within the ILR. Main providers must have collected and recorded (on the ILR) at least the amount of co-investment required for the whole apprenticeship up to the month before the completion payment is due, not counting any co-investment which might be required for the completion element itself.

189.4. Main providers will need to collect and record the full co-investment amount required by their final ILR submission relating to the academic year that the apprentice completes. For more information on submission dates, please refer to the ‘Data collection maintenance schedule’ on GOV.UK.

Financial contributions by an apprentice

190. The provider, or the employer, must not ask the apprentice to contribute financially to the eligible costs of training, on-programme or end-point assessment. This includes both where the individual has completed the apprenticeship successfully or has left the programme early (this includes where they have left the employer).

Evidence requirements

• Where an apprenticeship or part of an apprenticeship is funded through government-employer co-investment, the main provider must:

͂ Evidence they have collected the required employer co-investment contribution (this must be a transfer of funding that is visible in the main providers financial systems) – typically this would be in the form of a main provider invoice and corresponding employer payment; and

͂ Ensure employer co-investment payments match information on the ILR.

• Where the apprenticeship is exempt from employer co-investment, the main provider must:

͂ Provide confirmation of the apprentice’s date of birth

͂ Provide confirmation of Education, Health and Care plan and /or care leavers status, where applicable

190.1. Costs include any co-investment or additional training and assessment costs above the funding band, that the employer has paid directly to the provider, where this is part of the agreed apprenticeship.

Qualifying days for funding

191. To qualify for any apprenticeship funding the apprentice must be in learning for a minimum of 42 days between the learning start date and learning planned end date.

192. The provider must not include a learner in the ILR if they withdraw without completing one episode of learning, for example without attending the first class.

193. Where funding is paid for an apprentice who does not subsequently meet the relevant qualifying period, we will recover the funding from the provider. This includes any funding for learning support. Where applicable, funds will be returned to the employer’s apprenticeship service account.

Value added tax (VAT)

194. Supplies of training or end-point assessment, which are paid by government funding, including the apprenticeship levy, are exempt from VAT. This includes additional payments (see paragraphs 106 to 113). Providers must not include VAT in the prices they enter onto the ILR (see paragraph 197).

195. Main providers must determine the VAT treatment on their invoices to employers.

Evidence requirements

• There is a statement in the training plan or contract for services that the provider and the employer will not ask the apprentice to financially contribute to the eligible costs of the apprenticeship.

New for 1 August 2025

193 Clarification: We have clarified that where the apprentice does not meet the relevant qualifying period, we will also recover any funding paid for learning support.

193 Clarification: We have clarified that where applicable, funds will be returned to the employer’s apprenticeship service account.

196. We do not provide advice on VAT. Providers must always seek their own advice on VAT from HMRC if they are in any doubt about VAT treatment.

197. If main providers add VAT to invoices and the employer is VAT registered, the employer may be able to recover that VAT through its VAT returns. In determining the costs of training or end-point assessment, an employer will need to check with their main provider if VAT will be added and verify, internally or with HMRC, if it can be recovered.

Subsidy control

198. Funds received by providers from an employer’s apprenticeship service account (including government top-ups to funds), government-employer co-investment and additional payments do not fall within the scope of subsidy control from 1 August 2025 to 31 July 2026.

199. For more information on subsidy control, please visit the UK subsidy control regime guidance on GOV.UK.

200. Transfers of funds between employers may engage the subsidy control rules. For any transfer an employer receives, a percentage of the transferred funds may count towards the employer’s Minimal Financial Assistance (MFA) exemption. This percentage represents the amount of co-investment the employer would have otherwise had to contribute towards the apprenticeship, if funds had not been transferred.

200.1. The provider must ensure the employer completes an MFA declaration for relevant funding they receive through transfers.

201. If providers become aware that an employer exceeds their Minimal Financial Assistance exemption of £315,000 over a rolling 3-year period, they must contact us.

Evidence requirements Where applicable (for transfers), the employer must give a Minimal Financial Assistance declaration to their provider.

Delivery models

Apprenticeships funded by transfers of levy funds Rules for employers (including employer-providers and Flexi-Job Apprenticeship Agencies)

202. Levy-paying employers can transfer a percentage of their levy funds, which were declared for the previous tax year, to other employers, including Flexi-Job Apprenticeship Agencies (FJAAs). The annual transfer allowance percentage is currently set at 50% (and is based on actual transfer payments taken within the financial year).

202.1. The transfer allowance will be calculated, around the start of each tax year, and is based on the total amount of levy declared (to HMRC) during the previous tax year, with the English percentage applied, plus the 10% government top-up payment. This allowance is recalculated every tax year and any unused allowance will not be carried forward.

203. If employers are part of an account with connected organisations the transfer allowance will be calculated from the total levy declared by all organisations included within the account at the time of the calculation. They will not have an individual transfer account.

204. The transfer amount should cover 100% of the eligible training and assessment costs, up to the funding band maximum, of the apprenticeship standard. This does not include English and maths training up to and including level 2, which is funded separately.

205. By agreeing to fund an apprenticeship with a transfer, levy (sending) employers are committing to fund the apprenticeship over its entire duration until completion. Sending employers will need to ensure they do not exceed their transfer allowance and that they will have enough transfer allowance to cover these costs over the relevant number of years. Sending employers will not be able to stop payments once they have approved the apprenticeship on the apprenticeship service and transfer payments will be deducted from their levy account first, prior to their own apprenticeships.

206. Employers cannot jointly fund an apprenticeship with another levy-paying employer.

207. Transferred funds can only be used to pay for training and assessment for apprenticeship standards, for new apprenticeship starts. A transfer must be agreed and put in place before an apprentice (being funded by the transfer) starts their apprenticeship. The only exception to this is where the apprentice is

changing employer and an agreement to continue their apprenticeship with their new employer is via a transfer of levy funds – this must be agreed by the point the apprentice starts with their new employer.

208. There must not be any conditions imposed on sending a transfer, such as choosing the receiving employer’s main provider or end-point assessment organisation for them. This does not include any criteria that the sending employer may have set around their transfer pledge.

209. Employers must not seek or accept any incentives or inducements, or any other payments not authorised by us in exchange for sending or receiving a transfer.

210. Once the transfer of levy funds has been processed, the responsibility and liability of the transfer funded apprenticeship lies solely with the receiving employer – this includes the quality of the apprenticeship and the employment of the apprentice(s). The sending employer has no accountability for that apprenticeship going forward, apart from the commitment to fund the apprenticeship over its entire duration until completion. Specific rules for employers receiving a levy transfer

211. Once a transfer has been approved by the sending employer, receiving employers will have 6 weeks to accept these funds. If no action is taken, then the transfer funds will no longer be available – receiving employers would then have to apply for a new transfer should this funding still be required.

212. If the receiving employer has accepted these funds (within the 6 weeks), then they will have 3 months to use these funds, by linking the funds to an approved apprenticeship record. If no action is taken, then the transfer funds will no longer be available – receiving employers would then have to apply for a new transfer should this funding still be required.

213. Before entering the details on their apprenticeship service account, receiving employers must:

213.1. Agree the transfer details with the sending employer (either by an approved pledge application or by a direct transfer connection);

213.2. Agree with the main provider which apprenticeship standard the apprentice will be undertaking; and

213.3. Confirm the price that has been negotiated with the main provider and end-point assessment organisation. All parties will need to approve these details through the apprenticeship service – in instances where the original application was auto-approved, then this stage of the process will also be automated for the sending employer.

214. Levy transfer funds may be subject to subsidy control rules. Please refer to paragraph 200 for further information.

215. For employers who either do not pay the levy or have exhausted the levy funds in their apprenticeship service account, then if at any point the ‘sending’ employer has insufficient funds to cover the cost of the apprenticeship training, the receiving employer must pay co-investment to their main provider for the remainder (see paragraph 183 for exemptions). The rate at which co-investment will need to be paid will depend on when the apprenticeship training started.

216. For levy-paying employers, if at any point the ‘sending’ employer has insufficient funds to cover the cost of the apprenticeship training and the receiving employer has sufficient levy funds available then these funds will automatically be used before they enter co-investment.

217. If the total negotiated price of the apprenticeship exceeds the funding band maximum, receiving employers must pay all of the additional costs. Rules for providers

218. For the purposes of apprenticeships funded by a transfer, the receiving employer is treated as a levy-paying employer.

219. Providers must fully explain to the receiving employer the requirement to pay co-investment if the full cost of the apprenticeship cannot be met with a levy transfer or funds from their apprenticeship service account (see paragraphs 182 to 184). Providers must arrange to collect co-investment as set out in the co-investment section.

220. Providers can deliver training to apprentices they are funding through a transfer (i.e. they are also a levy-paying employer (this includes any connected companies)) – subject to this not being a condition of the transfer (see paragraph 208). This includes where providers are acting as a main provider or a subcontractor.

Evidence requirements

• Where the apprenticeship is being funded by a transfer of levy funds, providers must hold confirmation of who the sending employer is.

Subcontracting

Introduction

221. Funding for all elements of each apprenticeship will be routed through a single provider that the employer has chosen; this includes funding for English and maths.

New for 1 August 2025

231.4.2 Policy change: Main providers and employer-providers must not enter into a subcontracting agreement with any organisation under the £100,000 de minimis arrangement (i.e. with a subcontractor not on APAR), if the subcontractor has engaged the ‘Funding higher risk organisations and subcontractors policy’.

231.5 Policy change: A temporary exemption has been made for Initial Teacher Training. Main providers and employer-providers can use a subcontractor who is not on the published APAR where that subcontractor will only deliver apprenticeship training for the Level 6 Teacher apprenticeship standard and will deliver less than £100,000 of apprenticeship training and on-programme assessment, under contract across accredited initial teacher training main providers and employer-providers between 1 August and 31 July each year. The subcontractor must have a current UKPRN, cannot deliver full apprenticeship standards and must not have engaged the ‘Funding higher risk organisations and subcontractors’ policy.

248 Clarification: The wording in this section has been updated to align with the text in the Post-16 subcontracting guidance. This includes the new email address to send exemption requests to.

257 Clarification: The glossary definition for a new provider has been updated.

New for 1 January 2026 – Version 3

231.5 Clarification: We have clarified the two Level 6 Teacher apprenticeship standards that the APAR exception applies to.

241.8 Policy update: We have clarified some language following Ofsted’s introduction of the new scorecard system and revised inspection framework.

Requirement for the provider to directly deliver some training or on-programme assessment

222. The provider must directly deliver some of the apprenticeship training and /or on-programme assessment associated with each employer’s apprenticeship programme. By employer’s apprenticeship programme, we mean all of the apprentices that a provider has been contracted to deliver training to, at that employer, irrespective of the occupational area, standard or level.

222.1. The volume of training and /or on-programme assessment that the provider directly delivers for each employer must have some substance and must not be a token amount to satisfy this rule.

222.2. It must not be limited to a brief input at the start of each employer’s programme or involve delivery to just a few of a large number of apprentices. It does not include delivering only English or maths, or aspects of the apprenticeship which all apprentices must have, such as safeguarding or British values.

223. The provider can use subcontractors to complement their own delivery, if requested by an employer and agreed at the start of the apprenticeship. Within an employer’s apprenticeship programme (conditional on paragraph 222) subcontractors can deliver full or part-apprenticeship training (please see the exception at paragraph 231.4.2).

223.1. Further information can be found in Using Subcontractors in the Delivery of Apprenticeships. Requirement to provide a rationale for subcontracting

224. The provider must have a sound rationale for subcontracting, which must enhance the quality of the learner offer. The decision to subcontract must not be motivated by financial gain. The educational rationale for subcontracting must be clear and must meet one or more of the following aims:

224.1. To enhance the opportunities available for learners;

224.2. To fill gaps in niche or expert provision, or to provide better access to training facilities;

224.3. To support better geographical access for learners;

224.4. To offer an entry point for disadvantaged groups; or

224.5. To give consideration of the impact on individuals with shared protected characteristics.

225. The provider must also have, before agreeing the use of subcontractors with an employer, a list of the services they will provide when subcontracting and how they will determine the associated costs. This information must include:

225.1. The full range of fees retained by the provider and charges (which must be eligible costs) that apply, including funding retained for managing quality assurance / oversight and for administrative functions such as data returns.

225.1.1 The department reserves the right to require an explanation where the funding retained as a management fee exceeds 20% of the overall contract value but offers little value.

225.2. How the provider will determine that each cost claimed by a subcontractor is reasonable and proportionate to the delivery of their teaching or learning and contributes to delivering high quality learning.

226. The provider must review their subcontracting policy (see paragraphs 224 to 225), including their rationale for subcontracting, ahead of each funding year and this must be signed off by the person charged with overall responsibility for the organisation in the governance structure. Once reviewed, the updated policy must be published by 31 October each year.

227. Main providers must publish the information referred to in paragraphs 224 and

225 on their website (the rationale for subcontracting, the services they will provide and the associated costs). Employer-providers must hold this information but are not required to publish it on their website. Agreeing the use of subcontractors

228. Where the provider is a main provider, they must agree the use of subcontractors with the employer.

229. The provider must not use subcontractors if they do not have the knowledge, skills and experience of contracting with and managing subcontractors.

230. The provider must not use a subcontractor that they assess as being unsuitable, or whose quality of delivery is demonstrably inadequate, even where an employer decides not to work with the provider as a result. Selecting a subcontractor

231. The provider must only use subcontractors that satisfy one of the following 5 criteria:

231.1. They are on the published Apprenticeship Provider and Assessment Register (APAR) and have applied by the main provider or supporting provider application routes;

231.2. They are the apprentice’s employer, or a connected company or charity as defined by HMRC, and are on the published APAR, having applied through the employer-provider application route;

231.3. They have applied to the APAR subcontracting exception process and have been approved to be exempt from the requirement to be on this register and can produce written approval from the department confirming that this exception applies to them, including its duration; or

231.4. They are not on the published APAR but will deliver less than £100,000 of apprenticeship training and on-programme assessment, under contract across all main providers and employer-providers, between 1 August and

31 July each year.

231.4.1 Only main providers and employer-providers who have written confirmation from us that they have fully achieved the subcontracting standard, at the point of subcontracting, can use a subcontractor who is not on APAR (as described in paragraph 231.4).

231.4.2 Subcontractors working under the flexibility outlined in paragraph 231.4 must have a current UKPRN, cannot deliver full apprenticeship standards and must not have engaged the ‘Funding higher risk organisations and subcontractors’ policy.

231.5. They are not on the published APAR, will only deliver apprenticeship training for the Level 6 Teacher apprenticeship standards (ST0490 and ST1502) and will deliver less than £100,000 of apprenticeship training and on-programme assessment, under contract across accredited initial teacher training main providers and employer-providers, between 1 August

2025 and 31 July 2026.

231.5.1 Subcontractors working under the flexibility outlined in paragraph 231.5 must have a current UKPRN, cannot deliver full apprenticeship standards and must not have engaged the ‘Funding higher risk organisations and subcontractors’ policy.

232. The provider must not enter into any agreement for brokerage. By brokerage we mean the provision by a third party of services, for a fee, to source subcontractors to deliver on their behalf.

233. The provider must carry out their own due diligence checks on potential subcontractors, including taking account of any relevant Ofsted reports. This process and its results must be available for inspection by us and employers. A potential subcontractor’s presence on the APAR, or any other public register or database, must not be used as an indicator that they are suitable to deliver to the provider’s, or the employer’s, specific requirements.

234. The provider must have robust procedures in place to ensure they do not inadvertently fund extremist organisations through subcontracting of apprenticeship training and /or on-programme assessment.

235. The provider must ensure that they comply with current and relevant procurement regulations. If they are a contracting authority, this means that they must comply with the Public Contracts Regulations 2015. They must ensure that they select their subcontractor(s) fairly, transparently and without discrimination and they must ensure that potential subcontractors have sufficient capacity, quality and business standing to deliver the provision that is being subcontracted to them.

236. The provider must not make artificial distinctions or put in place convoluted delivery arrangements in order to avoid the application of these rules. For example, describing the arrangement as a partnership or collaborative arrangement.

237. The provider must not agree the use of any subcontractor where this would require them to subcontract apprenticeship training and /or on-programme assessment to a second level. All subcontractors must be contracted directly by the provider, who may have more than one subcontractor.

238. The provider must maintain the relationship with each employer at all times. They must not allow a subcontractor to lead that relationship. They must also make sure that learners supported through subcontracting arrangements know about the provider’s and the subcontractors’ respective roles and responsibilities in delivering the apprenticeship. The written agreement between the main provider and each employer (Note: Paragraphs 239 to 240 do not apply to employer-providers)

239. The main provider must clearly describe to each employer and potential subcontractor before each subcontracting relationship is agreed, the reason for subcontracting and all services they will provide and the associated costs when doing so.

239.1. This must include a list of specific costs for managing the subcontractor and for quality monitoring activities and any other support activity offered

by the main provider to the subcontractor. All of these costs must be individually itemised and describe how each cost contributes to delivering high quality training. They must also explain how such costs are reasonable and proportionate to delivery of the subcontracted apprenticeship training.

240. If the main provider and an employer subsequently agree to use a subcontractor, the main provider must put in place a written agreement with the employer that sets out and confirms the following for the delivery of their apprenticeship programme:

240.1. The apprenticeship training and /or on-programme assessment that the main provider will directly deliver and the amount of funding they will retain for this direct delivery;

240.2. The apprenticeship training and /or on-programme assessment that each subcontractor will provide and the amount of funding the main provider will pay each subcontractor for this contribution;

240.3. The specific amount of funding the main provider will retain to manage and monitor each subcontractor;

240.4. The specific amount of funding the main provider will retain to monitor the quality of the training and /or on-programme assessment each subcontractor provides, and for each support / administrative function provided, including data returns;

240.5. A detailed description of how the funding retained for the activities detailed in paragraph 240.4 contributes to delivering high quality training and how the funding retained is reasonable and proportionate to delivery of the apprenticeship training by the subcontractor that is described in paragraph 240.2; and

240.6. Any actual or perceived conflict of interest between the main provider and any subcontractors. For example, where the main provider and a subcontractor are part of the same group, share common directors or senior personnel, or where the main provider will benefit financially from using a particular subcontractor. The written agreement (the subcontract) between the provider and the subcontractor

241. The provider must put in place a legally binding written subcontracting agreement with the subcontractor before the subcontractor starts delivery of any subcontracted provision. We do not provide a template for subcontracts. As a minimum the subcontract must cover the following points:

241.1. An entitlement by the provider to exercise management controls over the subcontractor’s activity, including access by auditors appointed by either the provider or by us.

241.2. A list of all services the provider’s organisation will provide to the subcontractor and the associated costs for doing so. This must include:

241.2.1 A list of individually itemised, specific costs that the provider will charge for managing the subcontractor and how these are reasonable and proportionate to the delivery of their subcontracted provision.

241.2.2 Specific costs for quality monitoring activities and specific costs for any other support activities offered by the provider to the subcontractor and how these contribute to the delivery of high-quality learning.

241.2.3 Reference to the provider’s subcontracting policy, including the rationale for subcontracting and where it can be found on their website.

241.3. A requirement to give us and any other person nominated in writing by them, access to the subcontractor’s premises and to all documents related to their subcontracted delivery.

241.4. A requirement for the subcontractor to give the provider ILR data so that their organisation’s data returns to the department accurately reflect the subcontractor’s delivery information.

241.5. A requirement for the subcontractor to give the provider sufficient evidence to allow the provider to assess their performance against Ofsted’s education inspection framework and to incorporate relevant evidence into the provider’s self–assessment report and guide the judgements and grades within this self-assessment report.

241.6. A requirement for the subcontractor to always have suitably qualified staff available to provide the education and training funded by us.

241.7. A requirement for the subcontractor to co-operate with the provider if the subcontract ends for any reason to make sure that there is continuity of learning.

241.8. A requirement for the subcontractor to inform the provider if evidence of irregular financial or delivery issues arise. This could include but is not limited to non-delivery of training when funds have been paid, sanctions imposed by an awarding organisation, allegations of fraud, an urgent

improvement Ofsted grade for any provider or provision level evaluation area, and allegations or complaints by apprentices, staff members or other relevant parties.

242. The provider must make sure their subcontractors comply with the requirements set out in these funding rules and they must ensure that they include, in the subcontracting agreement, provisions that enable them to terminate the subcontract should their subcontractor be removed from APAR or cease to have a valid UKPRN.

243. The provider should take their own legal advice about how best to incorporate these provisions and wider terms and conditions in their subcontracting agreements. Delivery of apprenticeship training and on-programme assessment by subcontractors

244. The provider has overall responsibility for the quality of apprenticeship training and on-programme assessment undertaken by their subcontractors. They are responsible for the actions of their subcontractors connected to, or arising out of, the delivery of the services which are subcontracted to them. If a subcontractor fails to deliver, the provider will be responsible for making alternative arrangements for the delivery of education and training, protecting the audit trail and /or repaying us.

245. The provider must manage and monitor all of their subcontractors to ensure that high-quality delivery is taking place that meets the requirements of the agreement they have entered into with us for the provision of apprenticeship funded delivery (which must comply with the apprenticeship funding rules). The provider must ensure safeguarding is rigorously enforced.

245.1. It is not acceptable for any provider staff with a direct or indirect financial interest in the subcontractor to undertake any management control activities. This includes signing time sheets or invoices, as well as organising and /or carrying out monitoring activity on the subcontractor.

245.2. The provider must carry out a regular and substantial programme of quality-assurance checks on the apprenticeship training and on-programme assessment provided by their subcontractors, including visits at short notice and face-to-face interviews with staff and apprentices. The programme of checks must include whether the apprentices exist and are eligible, and must involve direct observation of initial guidance, assessment and delivery of training and /or on-programme assessment.

245.3. The provider’s findings must be consistent with these funding rules, their expectations and the subcontractor’s records. The provider must report any instances to us where this is not the case.

246. The prevent duty applies to subcontracted provision. It requires all providers to have due regard to the need to prevent people from being drawn into terrorism. All providers must comply with relevant legislation and any statutory responsibilities associated with the delivery of education and safeguarding of students and this includes students receiving provision under a subcontracting arrangement.

247. If any of the provider’s subcontractors undergoes a change of circumstances that affects their ability to continue to deliver under a subcontract, the provider must make alternative delivery arrangements for each apprentice affected by this, in agreement with the relevant employer. Change of circumstances include going into liquidation or administration, key delivery staff leaving the organisation, or removal from the APAR. The change of delivery arrangements must be recorded in the provider’s written agreement with the employer.

Subcontracting threshold and exemption cases (Note: this section does not apply to Local Authorities)

248. If the provider plans to pay subcontractors more than 25% of the apprenticeship funding they receive from us (determined using the financial information in the subcontractor declarations) and they do not think this can be reduced to less than this, they must submit an exemption case to us, to obtain the Department’s agreement in advance of this provision commencing. Providers must also get approval if they intend to continue with any previously agreed existing subcontracting arrangements where they will exceed the 25% threshold in the next academic year. If there is a point in the funding year that planned provision changes and providers will exceed the 25% threshold within that year they must apply for an in-year exemption, using the form available.

248.1. The provider must submit the exemption case, using the form in the Request Approval to Subcontract section, to the department by 30 April of each academic year before the provision is due to start. The exemption case should be sent to customer.help@service.education.gov.uk. We will only consider late requests where there is evidence of exceptional circumstances.

248.2. We will consider the request, taking into account the detail that has been provided, as well as data and information available both internally and externally. We will consider:

248.2.1 The provider’s subcontracting policy, including their fees and charges policy and whether this has been signed off by officers who are charged with governance in line with paragraph 226.

248.2.2 If the provider subcontracts more than £100,000 in a funding year, we will consider an external auditor’s report on the effectiveness of the processes and controls they have in place for managing subcontractors as set out in paragraph

251. 248.2.3 Whether the subcontracting is delivering to learners who may not otherwise have access to provision, including there being no alternative provision, or the characteristics of the learner meaning another provider may not be suitable.

Subcontracting reporting and external audit requirements

249. The provider must record subcontracted provision in line with the published guidance for the individualised learner record (ILR) data returns.

250. If a provider returns ILR data, in accordance with their funding agreement(s) they must submit a fully completed subcontractor declaration twice during each academic year. The first declaration must be made by 31 October and the second declaration must be made by 30 June.

250.1. All subcontractors must be included on the returns, including those that are not required to be on APAR (due to the exception process or the de minimis).

250.2. If a provider does not subcontract, they must provide a nil return to confirm this

250.3. The provider must also update their subcontractor declaration if their subcontracting arrangements change during the year. This is done via their MyESF account.

251. In accordance with the provider’s contract with us, they must meet the subcontracting standard as detailed in the subcontracting standard guidance if the aggregate total of all subcontractors delivering DfE funded provision on their behalf exceeds or is anticipated to exceed £100,000 in any single funding year. Whilst other programmes are excluded from these rules, for the purposes of calculating the aggregate total of subcontracted delivery the provider must include delivery of all DfE funded programmes, not just apprenticeships. Where the standard applies:

251.1. The provider must supply us with a report signed by an external auditor that provides assurance on the arrangements to manage and control their subcontractors. They must send a copy of the external auditor’s final report including the action plan of agreed recommendations and assurance declaration via the document exchange by 31 July of the relevant year (see subcontracting standard guidance for further information). The department will review this as part of our overall assurance arrangements.

251.1.1 If we do not receive the auditor’s report on the subcontracting standard by this date the provider will be deemed as non-compliant and funding may be affected / delayed. Disputes and issue resolution between the provider and employer

252. The provider is responsible for resolving issues and disputes between the employer and their subcontractors. They must provide employers and apprentices with their written complaints and dispute resolution procedure, policy and process. The first contact point for this must be included in the written agreement and in the training plan.

253. Agreements entered into between the provider and the employer must be legally binding. Dispute resolution should be in accordance with the terms of the written agreement, which ultimately would be enforceable through the courts.

254. The provider must make apprentices and their employers aware that they can contact the apprenticeship helpline regarding apprenticeship concerns, complaints and enquiries. The contact number and website must also be included in the employer’s written agreement and in the apprentice’s training plan. Special conditions for a main provider subcontracting to an employer-provider

255. Organisations who have successfully applied through the employer-provider route of the APAR are only eligible to deliver apprenticeship training and /or on-programme assessment to apprentices employed either by them or a connected company or charity as defined by HMRC. The main provider must ensure any employer-providers who are subcontractors meet this requirement.

256. The main provider must ensure that the subcontractor (the employer-provider) evidences the actual costs of delivery of apprenticeship training and on-programme assessment. Employer-providers must not profit from

apprenticeship delivery to their own employees or those of a connected company.

Special conditions for a provider to subcontract to a supporting provider

257. Subcontractors who have successfully applied to the supporting application route of the APAR must not receive more than £500,000, or £100,000 if the subcontractor is identified as new (see glossary definition), of apprenticeship funding for their delivery from 1 August to 31 July each year. The provider must ensure that they are not one of a number of organisations making payments to any supporting provider that exceed £500,000, or £100,000 if the subcontractor is identified as new, in any one year. We will place restrictions on the future use of subcontractors if this happens.

257.1. We will exclude any supporting provider that has applied to the APAR through the supporting provider application route where they allow their funding to exceed their respective total in any one year. Special conditions for all instances where the employer is the subcontractor

258. Where the employer is the subcontractor the provider must only pay them for actual costs of delivery. Employers must not profit from apprenticeship delivery to their own employees or those of a connected company.

Evidence requirements The provider has:

• Evidence that they are directly delivering some of the apprenticeship training and /or on-programme assessment associated with each employer’s apprenticeship programme (see paragraph 221) and are maintaining the relationship with each employer at all times (see paragraph 238).

• Made available their subcontracting policy (rationale for subcontracting, services and costs (see paragraphs 224 to 226)). Where the provider is a main provider they have also published this information (employer-providers are not required to publish this information).

• Agreed any subcontracting requirement with the employer. They have then followed the rules on selecting a suitable subcontractor (see paragraphs 231 to 237), put in place a written agreement with each employer to outline how they and the subcontractor will work together (see paragraphs 239 to 240) and have issued the relevant disputes and issue resolution information to employers and apprentices (see paragraphs 252 to 254).

• Put in place a written agreement (a subcontract) with each subcontractor (see paragraphs 241 to 242) and put in place arrangements to monitor the apprenticeship training and on-programme assessment delivered by subcontractors (see paragraphs 244 to 247).

• Evidence that they have fully achieved the subcontracting standard or, in the case of the teaching standard, are an accredited initial teacher training (ITT) provider that has been approved by DfE, where they are subcontracting to an organisation that is not on the published APAR. This organisation has a valid UKPRN, is not delivering a full apprenticeship standard and has confirmed that they will deliver less than the permitted value (see paragraph 231.4).

• Where needed, applied for an exemption to the subcontracting threshold by the published deadline (see paragraph 248).

• Met the relevant subcontracting reporting and external audit requirements (see paragraphs 249 to 251) including identifying all subcontractors and reporting them in the ILR and where applicable, the subcontracting standard.

Flexi-Job Apprenticeship Agencies (FJAAs)

259. In order to operate as a FJAA, an organisation must be on the Register of Flexi- Job Apprenticeship Agencies, comply with the FJAA Conditions of Registration and meet the requirements of the Quality Framework for Flexi-Job Apprenticeship Agencies. More information can be found on GOV.UK.

260. The main provider must report in their ILR that the apprentice is employed by a FJAA.

261. FJAAs must report in their apprenticeship service account that the apprentice is following the FJAA model (i.e. they are going on placements with host employers). They must also inform the apprentice that they are on this delivery model.

262. Where there is a gap between placements with host employers, FJAAs must continue to employ and pay the apprentice. Where possible, main providers should continue to deliver active learning to the apprentice (see paragraphs 87 to 90). If this is not possible the apprentice must be put on a break in learning (see paragraphs 274 to 278).

263. FJAAs who are on the Apprenticeship Provider and Assessment Register (APAR) as a registered provider, must act as an employer-provider when delivering training to their FJAA apprentices – meaning they can only claim actual training costs (see paragraph 102).

Evidence requirements Main providers must hold documented details of the apprentice’s placement(s) – this includes the name of the host employer(s) and the duration of the placement(s).

Prisoner apprenticeships

264. Prisoners serving a custodial sentence in England are eligible to undertake an apprenticeship under the alternative English apprenticeship rules (see paragraphs

69 to 70).

264.1. Prisoner apprentices may undertake end-point assessment prior to release. This applies to:

264.1.1 Prisoner apprentices who are enrolled on an apprenticeship whilst on Release on Temporary License (RoTL); and

264.1.2 Prisoner apprentices enrolled on an apprenticeship in the closed estate whose release date is within 2 years.

264.2. Military prisoners, immigration detainees and prisoners on remand are ineligible for apprenticeships offered in prisons.

265. Prisoner apprentices who are enrolled on an apprenticeship whilst on RoTL must be paid the appropriate minimum wage. Prisoner apprentices who are enrolled on an apprenticeship in the closed estate will be subject to prison rules and payments for work will reflect the existing rates of pay for work within a prison setting as set by HMPPS.

New for 1 August 2025

264.1 Policy update: We have updated the rules to reflect that prisoner apprentices may undertake end-point assessment prior to release. This applies to prisoner apprentices who are enrolled on an apprenticeship whilst on Release on Temporary Licence (RoTL) and prisoner apprentices enrolled on an apprenticeship in the closed estate whose release date is within 2 years.

Evidence requirements Confirmation from the employer that a completed and signed Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) is in place.

Change of circumstance

Overview

266. If any circumstances change that affect any agreements, providers and employers must revise existing agreements or create new agreements. This includes but is not limited to:

266.1. Changes to the apprentice’s programme (including changing to a new version of a standard see paragraphs 294 to 308)

266.2. Changes to price;

266.3. Changes to the apprentice’s eligibility;

266.4. Any updates required to the employer’s apprenticeship service account;

266.5. Changes to the apprentice’s contract or working pattern;

266.6. Changes to the apprenticeship duration;

266.7. Changes to the apprentice’s employer

266.8. Changes to the provider or subcontractor;

266.9. Breaks in learning.

267. If any change of circumstances is not included above, providers must seek advice from us about what action they must take. Please use our enquiry form.

Where training or assessment stops

268. Where a change of circumstance means that training and /or assessment is no longer being delivered, no further funds from an employer’s apprenticeship service account, government-employer co-investment or additional payments will be made.

269. In these circumstances:

New for 1 August 2025

271 Policy update: We have clarified the actions providers must take where a 16–17-year-old apprentice is at risk of becoming a NEET (not in education, employment or training).

269.1. Providers must inform us of the date at which training or assessment activity stopped through the ILR.

269.2. Main providers must agree with the employer the cost of the training and, where applicable, the end-point assessment delivered to date. They must ensure the employer has paid any mandatory co-investment due for any training or end-point assessment already delivered.

270. If an apprentice leaves without completing their apprenticeship, the last date of learning, including the apprenticeship programme learning aim, is the date that providers have evidence the apprentice was still in learning for any learning that was part of their apprenticeship.

271. Where a 16–17-year-old apprentice is at risk of becoming a NEET (not in education, employment or training), providers must:

271.1. Offer IAG support to any apprentice who is at risk of withdrawing from their apprenticeship earlier or who is at risk of not remaining in employment following completion of their programme.

271.1.1 This also includes both education and local employment opportunities.

271.2. Comply with their statutory duty to notify the relevant local authority of any 16-17-year-old who is no longer participating in training and is at risk of becoming NEET (this will enable them to access the local authority support systems).

272. When a change of circumstance results in over-payment of funds from an employer’s apprenticeship service account or government-employer co-investment, providers must repay any over-payments.

273. Main providers must follow the arrangements set out in their agreement with the employer for any over-payment by the employer and agree any reimbursement for employer co-investment made for learning paid for, but not undertaken; or learning delivered, but not yet paid up to the employee’s leave date, or the date of their break in learning, as needed.

273.1. When employment or an apprenticeship agreement has ended (resignation, dismissal or any other action by the apprentice or the employer that results in the apprenticeship agreement ending, with the exception of redundancy) and new employment has commenced within 30 days we do not expect a withdrawal to be recorded. Where new employment has not commenced within 30 days, the provider must, after

30 days, record the apprentice as on a break in learning. Where the apprentice does not re-start with a new employer after 12 weeks, the main

provider must withdraw the apprentice to ensure funds are not paid when the apprentice is not employed.

Breaks in learning

Provider-led breaks in learning

274. For front-loaded and block release models (see glossary definitions), that have been agreed with the employer and documented in the training plan, the provider must use a break in learning where there is no plan for any off-the-job training active learning (OTJT active learning) to take place within a 3 calendar month period (see paragraphs 88.1 to 88.2). This includes circumstances where active learning for English and /or maths is taking place.

274.1. For all other delivery models the provider must use a break in learning where there is no plan for OTJT active learning to take place within a calendar month (see paragraphs 89.1 to 89.2). This includes circumstances where active learning for English and /or maths is taking place.

275. The provider must not record a break in learning:

New for 1 August 2025

274 Clarification: Active learning has been renamed as OTJT active learning, to distinguish it from the new English and maths active learning requirement.

278 Policy update: To reflect the final additional payment for those apprenticeship standards who have a published typical duration of less than 12 months, and for foundation apprenticeships.

278 Policy update: To reflect the final care leavers’ bursary payment for those apprenticeship standards who have a published typical duration of less than 12 months, and for foundation apprenticeships.

New for 1 January 2026

274 / 274.1 Clarification: We have clarified that where there is no plan for any off-the-job training active learning to take place within the relevant period, the provider must use a break in learning. This includes circumstances where active learning for English and /or maths is taking place as these two policies must be managed separately.

275.1. For annual leave, public holidays and short-term absence (where the apprentice is able to continue OTJT active learning).

275.2. For those apprentices with a term-time only contract, where we do not require a break in learning for the month of August.

275.3. When employment or an apprenticeship agreement has ended. Where an apprentice has been made redundant please refer to the redundancy section in the rules (see paragraphs 279 to 283). In circumstances where an apprentice changes employer and there is a break in employment of more than 30 days and up to 12 weeks, please see paragraph 273.1.

Apprentice-led breaks in learning

276. An apprentice may request to take a break in learning from their apprenticeship if they plan to return to the same programme at a later date.

276.1. An apprentice may take a break in learning either with, or without a break in employment.

276.2. The reason for the break and its expected duration must be discussed with their employer. This could include medical treatment, parental leave or leave for other personal reasons. Principles

277. Where the apprentice takes a break in learning and then returns to the same apprenticeship, they will return to the same funding rules they were following prior to their break.

277.1. The provider must use the last date of evidenced learning activity for the programme (prior to the break in learning) as the learning actual end date.

277.2. When the apprentice returns from the break in learning, the employer must revise the apprenticeship agreement and the provider must revise the training plan, to account for the duration of the break. It must be clear that there have been multiple episodes of learning. The overall duration of the apprenticeship and the required volume of off-the-job training can remain the same (as though there had been no break in learning).

278. Providers must record breaks in learning on the ILR in a timely manner and re-plan the delivery of any remaining training and /or assessment following a break, if required. Employers may temporarily pause payments through their apprenticeship service account until the provider’s ILR has been updated.

278.1. We will stop making payments from funds in an employer’s apprenticeship service account or government-employer co-investment if an apprentice has a break in learning.

278.2. If an apprentice is on a break in learning when an additional payment is due, the payment will be delayed until the apprentice resumes their apprenticeship and has reached an overall total of 90 or 365 days in learning.

278.2.1 Where an apprentice is on a shorter apprenticeship (where the published typical duration of the apprenticeship standard is less than 12 months), or on a foundation apprenticeship, the payment will be delayed until the apprentice resumes their apprenticeship and has reached an overall total of 90 or

242 days in learning.

278.3. If an apprentice is on a break in learning when a care leavers’ bursary payment is due, the payment will be delayed until the apprentice resumes their apprenticeship and has reached an overall total of 60, 120 or 300 days in learning.

278.3.1 Where an apprentice is on a shorter apprenticeship (where the published typical duration of the apprenticeship standard is less than 12 months), or on a foundation apprenticeship, the payment will be delayed until the apprentice resumes their apprenticeship and has reached an overall total of 60,

120 or 242 days in learning.

Redundancy Apprentices who have their apprenticeship agreement terminated by reason of redundancy who, on the day of dismissal, are within six months of the final day of the apprenticeship practical period OR they have completed at least 75% of the apprenticeship practical period specified in the apprenticeship agreement:

279. Apprentices who meet the above definition may continue their apprenticeship training without being employed under an apprenticeship agreement (see paragraph 69). In these circumstances the provider can continue to deliver the apprenticeship training so long as all the remaining elements, including the end-point assessment, can still be successfully delivered.

279.1. We will fund 100% of the remaining costs of the total price, up to the funding band maximum.

279.2. In the case of an employer-provider, the apprentice must wish to continue to train with an organisation that they no longer work for.

280. The provider must:

280.1. Record the change in employment status in the ILR and ensure payments from the relevant apprenticeship service account stop, including where the apprenticeship is funded by a transfer. These dates must match the date the apprentice’s apprenticeship agreement was terminated.

280.2. Support the apprentice through to the end of the apprenticeship, including any assessment.

280.3. Make reasonable efforts to find the apprentice a new employer.

280.3.1 Where the provider is a main provider: If the apprentice finds a new employer where they can complete their apprenticeship, the new employer assumes all outstanding liabilities and benefits from that point. The main provider must negotiate a new price, if required, with the new employer and input this on the ILR. If the apprentice takes a job with an employer which is not related to their apprenticeship, we will continue to fund them as per paragraph 279.1.

280.3.2 Where the provider is an employer-provider: If the apprentice finds a new employer, the current employer-provider can no longer continue to deliver training. It would be the responsibility of the new employer to secure a provider for the apprentice, should both parties wish to continue with the apprenticeship. Apprentices who have their apprenticeship agreement terminated by reason of redundancy who, on the day of dismissal, have completed less than 75% of the apprenticeship practical period specified in the apprenticeship agreement and the remaining training represents a training duration of six months or more:

281. Apprentices who meet the above definition may continue their apprenticeship training without being employed under an apprenticeship agreement (see paragraph 69). In these circumstances the provider can continue to deliver the apprenticeship training, where it can be successfully delivered.

281.1. We will fund the remaining costs of the price previously negotiated for up to 12 weeks, while the apprentice seeks a new employer.

281.2. In the case of an employer-provider, the apprentice must wish to continue training with an organisation that they no longer work for.

282. The provider must:

282.1. Record the change in employment status in the ILR and ensure payments from the relevant apprenticeship service account stop, including where the apprenticeship is funded by a transfer. These dates must match the date the apprentice’s apprenticeship agreement was terminated.

282.2. Make reasonable efforts to find the apprentice a new employer.

282.2.1 Where the provider is a main provider: If the apprentice finds a new employer where they can complete their apprenticeship, then the new employer assumes all outstanding liabilities and benefits from that point. The main provider must negotiate a new price, if required, with the new employer and input this on the ILR. If the apprentice takes a job with an employer which is not related to their apprenticeship, we will continue to fund them as per paragraph 281.1.

282.2.2 Where the provider is an employer-provider: If the apprentice finds a new employer, the current employer-provider can no longer continue to deliver the training. It would be the responsibility of the new employer to secure a new provider for the apprentice, should both parties wish to continue with the apprenticeship.

283. Where a new employer is not found within 12 weeks, the provider must record the apprentice as withdrawn (by reason of redundancy) and they must issue the apprentice with a ‘record of apprenticeship part-completion’ to support them to find new employment.

283.1. This record must include, as a minimum, a) details of the apprentice; b) details of the apprenticeship (level, subject, start date and planned end date); c) the percentage of the apprenticeship completed; d) a summary of the knowledge, skills and behaviours that the apprentice has developed and evidenced during their time on the apprenticeship; and e) in the case of apprenticeships with mandatory qualifications, the qualification, or units thereof, achieved.

Maternity, adoption and shared parental leave

Maternity leave

284. An apprentice may carry out up to 10 days’ work for their employer during the maternity leave period without bringing their maternity leave period to an end (these days are referred to as keeping in touch or KIT days). If an apprentice wishes to use any of their 10 designated KIT days to continue with apprenticeship training, assessment or end-point assessment, they may do so and the provider can continue to support them.

284.1. Apprentices will lose their entitlement to statutory maternity pay and may bring their statutory maternity leave to an end if they undertake more than

10 days’ work (their KIT entitlement) during their maternity leave. This may not affect any contractual rights.

284.2. Where KIT days are to be used for off-the job training during a period of maternity leave, the provider is required to agree this in writing with the apprentice and the employer (see paragraph 288). Adoption leave

285. An apprentice may carry out up to 10 days’ work for their employer during their statutory adoption leave period without bringing their statutory adoption leave or

Evidence requirements The provider:

• Has evidence of the apprentice’s redundancy. This may be a copy of the apprentice’s dismissal notice (which cites the reason for dismissal as redundancy). In the absence of this, other evidence which would allow one to reasonably conclude that the apprentice has been made redundant is acceptable (e.g. an email informing employees that the business is closing / has closed). See the Glossary definition for the situations which amount to redundancy in law.

• Is able to show what reasonable efforts have been made to find the apprentice a new employer.

• Has, where an apprentice is withdrawn because they have been unable to find a new employer, recorded the withdrawal reason as redundancy and has issued the apprentice with a ‘record of apprenticeship part-completion’ that meets the criteria in paragraph 283.

adoption pay period to an end (these days are referred to as keeping in touch or KIT days). If an apprentice wishes to use any of their 10 designated KIT days to continue with apprenticeship training, assessment or end-point assessment, they may do so and the provider can continue to support them.

285.1. Where KIT days are to be used for off-the job training during a period of adoption leave, the provider is required to agree this in writing with the apprentice and the employer (see paragraph 288). Shared parental leave

286. An apprentice may work for up to 20 days during a shared parental leave period for each of their employers without bringing their leave to an end. These days are referred to as shared parental leave in touch or SPLIT days; these are separate and additional to any KIT days during a period of maternity or adoption leave. If an apprentice wishes to use any of their designated SPLIT days to continue with apprenticeship training, assessment or end-point assessment, they may do so and the provider can continue to support them.

286.1. Where SPLIT days are to be used for off-the job training during a period of shared parental leave, the provider is required to agree this in writing with the apprentice and the employer (see paragraph 288). Paternal leave

287. Statutory paternal leave is a maximum period of 2 weeks. The provider would be expected to structure the delivery of training around any paternal leave so that the apprentice can still complete their programme. The agreement

288. Where an apprentice and employer wish to use KIT / SPLIT days to continue with apprenticeship off-the-job training and /or assessment, the provider must complete the following agreement with them. This agreement must be signed by all parties (provider, employer, apprentice) and must include:

288.1. The apprentice’s reason behind their request to continue apprenticeship training during KIT / SPLIT days;

288.2. The number of KIT / SPLIT days to be used and the number of hours proposed to be spent on training on these days (any training carried out on any KIT / SPLIT day would constitute 1 full day’s work and therefore one KIT / SPLIT day);

288.3. An acknowledgement by the apprentice that in undertaking training and /or assessment, including end-point assessment, on KIT / SPLIT days this

will impact their entitlement to KIT / SPLIT days, as well as statutory maternity / adoption / shared parental leave and pay (i.e. they may lose statutory maternity / adoption / shared parental leave and pay if KIT / SPLIT days are exceeded); and

288.4. An agreement by the employer and provider in relation to the timing of KIT / SPLIT days relative to the monthly payments that the provider will continue to receive if a break in learning is not utilised.

288.4.1 A break in learning must be used to pause funding if there is no plan for any active learning to take place on a KIT / SPLIT day within a calendar month block

289. During a period of maternity / adoption / shared parental leave, only the off-the-job training that is delivered on the actual KIT / SPLIT day(s) can be included towards the minimum off-the-job training requirement by the provider. At all other times during the leave period, the apprentice is not ‘working’ and therefore any training delivered during this time would not meet the definition of off-the-job training.

290. The intention of the policy arrangements described in paragraphs 284 to 288 is to allow an apprentice with minimal training days left (less than the available number of KIT / SPLIT days) to complete their apprenticeship during their leave or to use these days to allow for an incremental return to training prior to returning to the workplace (e.g. to train with a cohort prior to a return to the workplace).

291. The maternity, adoption and shared parental leave policy and the use of KIT / SPLIT days is not designed to support sporadic activity during a long period of leave, and the provider must, where possible, avoid multiple breaks in learning. Actions for the provider and employer to take

292. If the apprentice is not intending to use any KIT / SPLIT days to continue off-the-job training during their period of maternity / adoption / shared parental leave, please follow the guidance for breaks in learning (see paragraphs 274 to 278). The break in learning would be used for the full period of maternity / adoption / shared parental leave.

293. If the apprentice is intending to use KIT / SPLIT days to continue off-the-job training during their period of maternity / adoption / shared parental leave, please see paragraphs 288 to 291.

Changing to a new version of a standard

294. The funding rules in this section will apply irrespective of the apprentice’s start date and will include existing learners who started their apprenticeship in previous funding years. They will apply where an existing apprentice wishes to move to a newer version of the same standard including those assigned new version costs under Skills England’s revisions, adjustments and dispensations process.

294.1. Apprentices already engaged on the earlier version of a standard may transfer to the latest version of the same standard (that is where the ST number remains the same) at any stage within their apprenticeship subject to meeting the rules on end-point assessment. Where an apprentice is already engaged on a standard which has been replaced with a new apprenticeship standard (that is with a new ST code), this would be treated as a change of programme.

295. Where an apprentice wishes to move to a new version of a standard, the provider must ensure that this is agreed by them, the apprentice and their employer.

295.1. The provider must make the apprentice and employer aware of the differences between the version of the apprenticeship the apprentice is registered on, in comparison to the one they are transferring to, in terms of the demands of the standards and the requirements of the end-point assessment plan.

295.2. The main provider and employer must update both the apprenticeship agreement and the training plan to reflect this agreement.

296. Where an apprentice changes version, the provider must make sure that the training and assessment they receive across the whole apprenticeship delivers occupational competence in all aspects of the new standard version and enables them to pass the end-point assessment.

297. Apprentices must not move back to a previous version of the same standard once they have moved to a new version.

Evidence requirements

• A copy of the agreement, signed by all parties, which complies with the detail set out in paragraph 288.

298. Apprentices who are returning from a break in learning may return to the version of the standard they were on before their break in learning, even where it has been closed to new starts.

299. If the apprentice is already registered with an end-point assessment organisation, the provider must:

299.1. Confirm with them that they will be approved and ready to deliver the end-point assessment for the new version by the time the apprentice requires it, before enabling the apprentice to move versions; and

299.2. Inform them when the apprentice has transferred to a new version.

300. If the apprentice is not registered with an end-point assessment organisation, or the existing end-point assessment organisation is unable to confirm that they will be approved and ready to deliver the end-point assessment for the new version by the time the apprentice requires it, the provider must ensure that an alternative end-point assessment organisation will be available and ready to deliver the end-point assessment for the new version before enabling the apprentice to move versions (subject to the rules in paragraphs 114 and 115).

301. If no end-point assessment organisation will be approved and available to deliver the end-point assessment for the new version by the time the apprentice requires it, the apprentice must not transfer to the new version.

302. Where an apprentice is moving versions, there will be no change to how their standard is recorded on the ILR; the provider must continue to record them on the ILR on the standard that they started on.

303. Where the apprentice is funded through the apprenticeship service, the provider must ensure that the apprentice’s details in the service are updated to assign them on to the new version.

304. The provider must make sure that the combined duration of the apprentice’s time on the legacy version and the new version meets the apprenticeship minimum duration requirements.

305. Where an existing apprentice moves versions, they will continue on the same funding band that they started on.

306. Employers may choose to re-negotiate the price with the main provider / end-point assessment organisation for the new version.

307. Employer-providers may wish to change the cost and /or re-negotiate the price with the end-point assessment organisation for the new version.

308. If the employer negotiates an overall price / the overall cost is more than the

funding band maximum for the standard that the apprentice started on, then the employer must pay in full the difference between the band maximum for the original standard and the total cost. This cannot be funded from the apprenticeship service account.

Evidence requirements

309. Providers must give accurate unique learner number (ULN) information to the apprenticeship service, awarding organisations and end-point assessment organisations and ensure all information used to register an apprentice is correct.

310. Providers must hold evidence to assure us that they are using apprenticeship funding appropriately. Most evidence will occur naturally from their normal business process. If evidence is not available funding may be at risk.

310.1. Providers must make this evidence pack available to us on request.

310.2. The apprentice and /or employer must confirm the information they provide is correct when it is collected. Providers must have evidence of this, which can include electronic formats.

310.3. Where information is held centrally, providers only need to refer to the source. Confirmation and signatures

311. We accept electronic evidence, including electronic / digital signatures. Where evidence is electronic, providers must have wider systems and processes in place to assure that apprentices exist and are eligible for funds.

312. Where an electronic or digital signature is being held, from any party for any reason, providers must ensure it is non-refutable. Systems and processes must be in place to assure to us that the original signature has not been altered. Where any document needs to be renewed and a new signature taken, it must be clear from when the new document takes effect and both must be held.

312.1. Both electronic and digital signatures are acceptable, we do not specify which must be used, only that a secure process to obtain and store signatures is followed.

312.2. An electronic signature is defined as any electronic symbol or process that is associated with any record or document where there is an intention to sign the document by any party involved. An electronic signature can be anything from a check box to a signature.

312.3. A digital signature is where a document with an electronic signature is secured by a process making it non-refutable. It is a digital fingerprint which captures the act of signing by applying security to a document. Usually documents which have a digital signature embedded are extremely secure and cannot be accessed or amended easily.

313. Providers must keep effective and reliable evidence and are responsible for making the evidence they hold easily available to us when we need it.

Individualised learner record (ILR)

314. The evidence pack must include all information reported to us in the ILR and the earnings adjustment statement (EAS) and if it applies, the supporting evidence for the data providers report.

315. Providers must accurately complete all ILR fields for an apprentice as required in the ILR specification, even if they are not used for funding. This includes reporting an accurate National Insurance number for the apprentice. Employers must also make sure that the PAYE scheme used in the apprenticeship service account for the apprentice is linked to the National Insurance number for the apprentice declared by the provider in the ILR. Where provider data does not support the funding they have claimed, we will take action to get this corrected and could recover funds.

316. The ILR must accurately reflect what has happened. Providers must not report inaccurate information even where they perceive that this would result in a more equitable claim for funding or accurate record of performance.
