Status of these guidelines
1. These guidelines are issued pursuant to Article 16 of Regulation (EU) No 1093/20107 . In
accordance with Article 16(3) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010, competent authorities and
financial institutions, including institutions, must make every effort to comply with the
guidelines.
2. Guidelines set the EBA view of appropriate supervisory practices within the European System
of Financial Supervision or of how Union law should be applied in a particular area. Competent
authority as defined in Article 4(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 to whom guidelines apply
should comply by incorporating them into their practices as appropriate (e.g. by amending
their legal framework or their supervisory processes), including where guidelines are directed
primarily at institutions.
Reporting requirements
3. According to Article 16(3) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010, competent authority must notify
the EBA as to whether they comply or intend to comply with these guidelines, or otherwise
with reasons for non-compliance, by ([dd.mm.yyyy]). In the absence of any notification by this
deadline, competent authority will be considered by the EBA to be non-compliant.
Notifications should be sent by submitting the form available on the EBA website to
compliance@eba.europa.eu with the reference ‘EBA/GL/2021/05’. Notifications should be
submitted by persons with appropriate authority to report compliance on behalf of their
competent authority. Any change in the status of compliance must also be reported to EBA.
4. Notifications will be published on the EBA website, in line with Article 16(3) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010.
2. Subject matter, scope and definitions
Subject matter
5. These guidelines specify further the internal governance arrangements, processes and
mechanisms that institutions, that are subject to Directive 2013/36/EU8 and investment firms
that are subject to Title VII of Directive 2013/36/EU in application of Article 1(2) and (5) of
Regulation 2019/2033/EU, should implement in accordance with Article 74(1) of
Directive 2013/36/EU to ensure their effective and prudent management.
Addressees
These guidelines are addressed to competent authorities as defined in point (i) of Article 4 2)
of Regulation (EU) 1093/2010, and to financial institutions as defined in Article 4(1) of
Regulation (EU) 1093/2010 that are either institutions for the purposes of the application of
Directive 2013/36/EU as defined in point 3 of Article 3(1) of Directive 2013/36/EU also having
regard to Article 3 (3) of that Directive or investment firms subject to Title VII of
Directive 2013/36/EU in application of Article 1(2) and (5) of Regulation 2019/2033/EU
(‘institutions’).
Scope of application
6. These guidelines apply in relation to institutions’ governance arrangements, including their
organisational structure and the corresponding lines of responsibility, processes to identify,
manage, monitor and report all risks9 they are or might be exposed to, and internal control
framework.
7. The guidelines intend to embrace all existing board structures and do not advocate any
particular structure. The guidelines do not interfere with the general allocation of competences
in accordance with national company law. Accordingly, they should be applied irrespective of
the board structure used (unitary and/or a dual board structure and/or another structure)
across Member States. The management body, as defined in Points (7) and (8) of Article 3(1) of
Directive 2013/36/EU, should be understood as having management (executive) and
supervisory (non-executive) functions.
8. The terms ‘management body in its management function’ and ‘management body in its
supervisory function’ are used throughout these guidelines without referring to any specific governance structure, and references to the management (executive) or supervisory (non-
executive) function should be understood as applying to the bodies or members of the
management body responsible for that function in accordance with national law. When
implementing these guidelines, competent authorities should take into account their national
company law and specify, where necessary, to which body or members of the management
body those functions should apply.
9. In Member States where the management body delegates, partially or fully, the executive
functions to a person or an internal executive body (e.g. a chief executive officer (CEO),
management team or executive committee), the persons who perform those executive
functions on the basis of that delegation should be understood as constituting the management
function of the management body. For the purposes of these guidelines, any reference to the
management body in its management function should be understood as including also the
members of the executive body or the CEO, as defined in these guidelines, even if they have not
been proposed or appointed as formal members of the institution’s governing body or bodies
under national law.
10. In Member States where some responsibilities are directly exercised by shareholders, members
or owners of the institution instead of the management body, institutions should ensure that
such responsibilities and related decisions are in line, as far as possible, with the guidelines
applicable to the management body.
11. The definitions of CEO, chief financial officer (CFO) and key function holder used in these
guidelines are purely functional and are not intended to impose the appointment of those
officers or the creation of such positions unless prescribed by relevant EU or national law.
12. Institutions should comply and competent authorities should ensure that institutions comply
with these guidelines on an individual, sub-consolidated and consolidated basis, in accordance
with the level of application set out in Article 109 of Directive 2013/36/EU.
3. Implementation
Date of application
14. These updated guidelines apply from 31 December 2021.
15. The EBA Guidelines on internal governance (EBA/GL/2017/11) of 26 September 2017 are
repealed with effect from 31 December 2021.
4. Guidelines
16. The proportionality principle encoded in Article 74(2) of Directive 2013/36/EU aims to ensure that internal governance arrangements are consistent with the individual risk profile and
business model of the institution, so that the objectives of the regulatory requirements and
provisions are effectively achieved.
17. Institutions should take into account their size and internal organisation, and the nature, scale
and complexity of their activities, when developing and implementing internal governance
arrangements. Significant institutions should have more sophisticated governance
arrangements, while small and less complex institutions may implement simpler governance
arrangements. Institutions should however note that the size or systemic importance of an
institution may not, by itself, be indicative of the extent to which an institution is exposed to risks.
18. For the purpose of the application of the principle of proportionality and in order to ensure an appropriate implementation of the regulatory requirements and these guidelines, all the following aspects should be taken into account by institutions and competent authorities:
a. the size in terms of the balance-sheet total of the institution and its subsidiaries within
the scope of prudential consolidation;
b. the geographical presence of the institution and the size of its operations in each
jurisdiction;
c. the legal form of the institution, including whether the institution is part of a group
and, if so, the proportionality assessment for the group;
d. whether it is a listed institution;
e. whether the institution is authorised to use internal models for the measurement of
capital requirements (e.g. the internal ratings-based approach);
f. the type of authorised activities and services performed by the institution (e.g. see also
Annex 1 to Directive 2013/36/EU and Annex 1 to Directive 2014/65/EU);
g. the underlying business model and strategy; the nature and complexity of the business
activities, and the institution’s organisational structure;
h. the risk strategy, risk appetite and actual risk profile of the institution, taking into
account also the result of the SREP capital and SREP liquidity assessments;
i. the ownership and funding structure of the institution;
j. the type of clients (e.g. retail, corporate, institutional, small businesses, public entities)
and the complexity of the products or contracts;
k. the outsourced functions and distribution channels;
l. the existing information technology (IT) systems, including continuity systems and
outsourcing functions in this area; and
m. whether the institution falls under the definition in Points 145 and 146 of Article 4(1)
of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of a small and non-complex institution or a large
institution.
Title II – Role and composition of the management body and
committees
1 Role and responsibilities of the management body
19. In accordance with Article 88(1) of Directive 2013/36/EU, the management body must have
ultimate and overall responsibility for the institution and defines, oversees and is accountable
for the implementation of the governance arrangements within the institution that ensure
effective and prudent management of the institution.
20. The duties of the management body should be clearly defined, distinguishing between the
duties of the management (executive) function and the supervisory (non-executive) function.
The responsibilities and duties of the management body should be described in a written
document and duly approved by the management body. All members of the management body
should be fully aware of the structure and responsibilities of the management body, and of the
division of tasks between different functions of the management body and its committees.
21. The management body in its supervisory function and in its management function should
interact effectively. Both functions should provide each other with sufficient information to
allow them to perform their respective roles. In order to have appropriate checks and balances
in place, the decision-making within the management body should not be dominated by a single
member or a small subset of its members.
22. The management body’s responsibilities should include setting, approving and overseeing the
implementation of:
a. the overall business strategy and the key policies of the institution within the
applicable legal and regulatory framework, taking into account the institution’s long-
term financial interests and solvency;
b. the overall risk strategy, the institution’s risk appetite and its risk management
framework and measures to ensure that the management body devotes sufficient time
to risk and risk management issues;
c. an adequate and effective internal governance and internal control framework, as
defined in Title V, that:
i. includes a clear organisational structure and well-functioning independent
internal risk management, compliance and audit functions that have
sufficient authority, stature and resources to perform their functions;
ii. ensures compliance with applicable regulatory requirements in the context
of the prevention of money laundering and terrorism financing;
d. the amounts, types and distribution of both internal capital and regulatory capital to
adequately cover the risks of the institution;
e. targets for the liquidity management of the institution;
f. a remuneration policy that is in line with the remuneration principles set out in
Articles 92 to 95 of Directive 2013/36/EU and the EBA guidelines on sound
remuneration policies under Articles 74(3) and 75(2) of Directive 2013/36/EU13;
g. arrangements aimed at ensuring that the individual and collective suitability
assessments of the management body are carried out effectively, that the composition
and succession planning of the management body are appropriate, and that the
management body performs its functions effectively14;
h. a selection and suitability assessment process for key function holders15;
i. arrangements aimed at ensuring the internal functioning of each committee of the
management body, when established, detailing the:
i. role, composition and tasks of each of them;
EPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
ii. appropriate information flow, including the documentation of
recommendations and conclusions, and reporting lines between each
committee and the management body, competent authorities and other
parties;
j. a risk culture in line with Section 9 of these guidelines, which addresses the institution’s
risk awareness and risk-taking behaviour;
k. a corporate culture and values in line with Section 10, which foster responsible and
ethical behaviour, including a code of conduct or similar instrument;
l. a conflict-of-interest policy at institutional level in line with Section 11 and for staff in
line with Section 12; and
m. arrangements aimed at ensuring the integrity of the accounting and financial reporting
systems, including financial and operational controls and compliance with the law and
relevant standards.
23. When setting, approving and overseeing the implementation of the aspects listed in
Paragraph 22 the management body should aim at ensuring a business model, governance
arrangements, including a risk management framework that take into account all risks. When
taking into account all risks, institutions are exposed to, institutions should take into account all relevant risk factors, including environmental, social and governance risk factors. Institutions
should consider that the latter may drive their prudential risks, including credit risks, e.g. via risk factors related to the transition to a sustainable economy or external physical climate-
related events that may affect debtors, market, liquidity, operational risks and also reputational
risks, e.g. via social and governance risk factors, e.g. in the context of outsourcing
arrangements16. Such risks include, e.g. legal risks in the area of contractual or labour law, risks related to potential human rights violations or other ESG risk factors that may affect the country where a service provider is located and its ability to provide the agreed service levels.
24. The management body must oversee the process of disclosure and communications with
external stakeholders and competent authorities.
25. All members of the management body should be informed about the overall activity, financial
and risk situation of the institution, taking into account the economic environment, and about
decisions taken that have a major impact on the institution’s business.
26. A member of the management body may be responsible for an internal control function as
referred to in Title V, Section 19.1, provided that the member does not have other mandates
that would compromise the member’s internal control activities and the independence of the
internal control function.
27. The management body should monitor, periodically review and address any weaknesses
identified regarding the implementation of processes, strategies and policies related to the
responsibilities listed in Paragraphs 22 and 23. The internal governance framework and its
implementation should be reviewed and updated on a periodic basis taking into account the
proportionality principle, as further explained in Title I. A deeper review should be carried out
where material changes affect the institution.
2 Management function of the management body
28. The management body in its management function should engage actively in the business of
an institution and should take decisions on a sound and well-informed basis.
29. The management body in its management function should be responsible for the
implementation of the strategies set by the management body and discuss regularly the
implementation and appropriateness of those strategies with the management body in its
supervisory function. The operational implementation may be performed by the institution’s
management.
30. The management body in its management function should constructively challenge and
critically review propositions, explanations and information received when exercising its
judgement and taking decisions. The management body in its management function should
comprehensively report, and inform regularly and where necessary without undue delay the
management body in its supervisory function of the relevant elements for the assessment of a
situation, the risks and developments affecting or that may affect the institution, e.g. material
decisions on business activities and risks taken, the evaluation of the institution’s economic and business environment, liquidity and sound capital base, and assessment of its material risk
exposures.
31. Without prejudice to the national transposition of Directive 2015/849/EU, the management
body should identify one of its members in line with the requirements under Article 46(4) of
Directive 2015/849/EU Anti-Money Laundering Directive (AMLD) who is responsible for the
implementation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply
with this directive, including the corresponding AML/CFT policies and procedures in the
institution and at the level of the management body.
32. The role of the members of the management body in its supervisory function should include
monitoring and constructively challenging the strategy of the institution.
33. Without prejudice to national law the management body in its supervisory function should
include independent members as provided for in Section 9.3 of the joint ESMA and EBA
guidelines on the assessment of the suitability of members of the management body and key
function holders under Directive 2013/36/EU and Directive 2014/65/EU.
34. Without prejudice to the responsibilities assigned under the applicable national company law,
the management body in its supervisory function should:
a. oversee and monitor management decision-making and actions and provide effective
oversight of the management body in its management function, including monitoring
and scrutinising its individual and collective performance and the implementation of
the institution’s strategy and objectives;
b. constructively challenge and critically review proposals and information provided by
members of the management body in its management function, as well as its decisions;
c. taking into account the proportionality principle as set out in Title I, appropriately fulfil
the duties and role of the risk committee, the remuneration committee and the
nomination committee, where no such committees have been set up;
d. ensure and periodically assess the effectiveness of the institution’s internal
governance framework and take appropriate steps to address any identified
deficiencies;
e. oversee and monitor that the institution’s strategic objectives, organisational structure
and risk strategy, its risk appetite and risk management framework, as well as other
policies (e.g. remuneration policy) and the disclosure framework are implemented
consistently;
f. monitor that the risk culture of the institution is implemented consistently;
g. oversee the implementation and maintenance of a code of conduct or similar code and
effective policies to identify, manage and mitigate actual and potential conflicts of
interest;
h. oversee the integrity of financial information and reporting, and the internal control
framework, including an effective and sound risk management framework;
i. ensure that the heads of internal control functions are able to act independently and,
regardless the responsibility to report to other internal bodies, business lines or units,
can raise concerns and warn the management body in its supervisory function directly,
where necessary, when adverse risk developments affect or may affect the institution;
and
j. monitor the implementation of the internal audit plan, after the prior involvement of
the risk and audit committees, where such committees are established.
4 Role of the chair of the management body
35. The chair of the management body should lead the management body, contribute to an
efficient flow of information within the management body and between the management body
and the committees thereof, where established, and should be responsible for its effective
overall functioning.
36. The chair should encourage and promote open and critical discussion and ensure that
dissenting views can be expressed and discussed within the decision-making process.
37. As a general principle, the chair of the management body should be a non-executive member.
Where the chair is permitted to assume executive duties, the institution should have measures
in place to mitigate any adverse impact on the institution’s checks and balances (e.g. by
designating a lead board member or a senior independent board member, or by having a larger
number of non-executive members within the management body in its supervisory function).
In particular, in accordance with Article 88(1)(e) of Directive 2013/36/EU, the chair of the
management body in its supervisory function of an institution must not exercise simultaneously
the functions of a CEO within the same institution, unless justified by the institution and
authorised by competent authorities.
38. The chair should set meeting agendas and ensure that strategic issues are discussed with
priority. He or she should ensure that decisions of the management body are taken on a sound
and well-informed basis and that documents and information are received in enough time
before the meeting.
39. The chair of the management body should contribute to a clear allocation of duties between
members of the management body and the existence of an efficient flow of information
between them, in order to allow the members of the management body in its supervisory
function to constructively contribute to discussions and to cast their votes on a sound and well-informed basis.
5 Committees of the management body in its supervisory function
5.1 Setting up committees
40. In accordance with Article 109(1) of Directive 2013/36/EU in conjunction with Articles 76(3), 88(2), and 95(1) of Directive 2013/36/EU, all institutions that are themselves significant, considering the individual, sub-consolidated and consolidated levels, must establish risk,
nomination 18 and remuneration 19 committees to advise the management body in its
supervisory function and to prepare the decisions to be taken by this body. Non-significant
institutions, including when they are within the scope of prudential consolidation of an
institution that is significant in a sub-consolidated or consolidated situation, are not obliged to establish those committees.
41. Where no risk or nomination committee is established, the references in these guidelines to
those committees should be construed as applying to the management body in its supervisory
function, taking into account the principle of proportionality as set out in Title I.
42. Institutions may, taking into account the criteria set out in Title I of these guidelines, establish other committees (e.g. anti-money laundering/counter terrorist financing (AML/CTF), ethics,
conduct and compliance committees).
43. Institutions should ensure a clear allocation and distribution of duties and tasks between
specialised committees of the management body.
44. Each committee should have a documented mandate, including the scope of its responsibilities,
from the management body in its supervisory function and establish appropriate working
procedures.
45. Committees should support the supervisory function in specific areas and facilitate the
development and implementation of a sound internal governance framework. Delegating to
committees does not in any way release the management body in its supervisory function from
collectively fulfilling its duties and responsibilities.
5.2 Composition of committees20
46. All committees should be chaired by a non-executive member of the management body who is
able to exercise objective judgement.
47. Independent members21 of the management body in its supervisory function should be actively
involved in committees.
48. Where committees have to be set up in accordance with Directive 2013/36/EU or national law,
they should be composed of at least three members.
49. Institutions should ensure, taking into account the size of the management body and the
number of independent members of the management body in its supervisory function, that
committees are not composed of the same group of members that forms another committee.
50. Institutions should consider the occasional rotation of chairs and members of committees,
taking into account the specific experience, knowledge and skills that are individually or
collectively required for those committees.
51. The risk and nomination committees should be composed of non-executive members of the
management body in its supervisory function of the institution concerned. The audit committee
should be composed in accordance with Article 41 of Directive 2006/43/EC 22 . The
remuneration committee should be composed in accordance with Section 2.4.1 of the EBA
guidelines on sound remuneration policies.
52. In G-SIIs and O-SIIs, the nomination committee should include a majority of members who are
independent and be chaired by an independent member. In other significant institutions,
determined by competent authorities or national law, the nomination committee should
include a sufficient number of members who are independent; such institutions may also
consider as a good practice having a chair of the nomination committee who is independent.
53. Members of the nomination committee should have, individually and collectively, appropriate
knowledge, skills and expertise concerning the selection process and suitability requirements
as set out under Directive 2013/36/EU.
54. In G-SIIs and O-SIIs, the risk committee should include a majority of members who are
independent. In G-SIIs and O-SIIs the chair of the risk committee should be an independent
member. In other significant institutions, determined by competent authorities or national law,
the risk committee should include a sufficient number of members who are independent and
the risk committee should be chaired, where possible, by an independent member. In all
institutions, the chair of the risk committee should be neither the chair of the management
body nor the chair of any other committee.
55. Members of the risk committee should have, individually and collectively, appropriate
knowledge, skills and expertise concerning risk management and control practices.
61. Where established, the risk committee should at least:
a. advise and support the management body in its supervisory function regarding the
monitoring of the institution’s overall actual and future risk strategy and risk appetite,
taking into account all types of risks, to ensure that they are in line with the business
strategy, objectives, corporate culture and values of the institution;
b. assist the management body in its supervisory function in overseeing the
implementation of the institution’s risk strategy and the corresponding limits set;
c. oversee the implementation of the strategies for capital and liquidity management as
well as for all other relevant risks of an institution, such as market, credit, operational
(including legal and IT risks), and reputational risks, in order to assess their adequacy
against the approved risk strategy and risk appetite;
d. provide the management body in its supervisory function with recommendations on
necessary adjustments to the risk strategy resulting from, inter alia, changes in the
business model of the institution, market developments or recommendations made
by the risk management function;
e. provide advice on the appointment of external consultants that the supervisory
function may decide to engage for advice or support;
f. review a number of possible scenarios, including stressed scenarios, to assess how the
institution’s risk profile would react to external and internal events;
g. oversee the alignment between all material financial products and services offered to
clients and the business model and risk strategy of the institution25
. The risk committee should assess the risks associated with the offered financial products and services and take into account the alignment between the prices assigned to and the profits gained from those products and services; and
h. assess the recommendations of internal or external auditors and follow up on the
appropriate implementation of measures taken.
62. The risk committee should collaborate with other committees whose activities may have an
impact on the risk strategy (e.g. audit and remuneration committees) and regularly
communicate with the institution’s internal control functions, in particular the risk
management function.
63. When established, the risk committee must, without prejudice to the tasks of the remuneration committee, examine whether incentives provided by the remuneration policies and practices take into consideration the institution’s risk, capital and liquidity and the likelihood and timing of earnings.
5.5 Role of the audit committee
64. In accordance with Directive 2006/43/EC26, where established, the audit committee should,
inter alia:
a. monitor the effectiveness of the institution’s internal quality control and risk
management systems and, where applicable, its internal audit function, with regard to
the financial reporting of the audited institution, without breaching its independence;
b. oversee the establishment of accounting policies by the institution;
c. monitor the financial reporting process and submit recommendations aimed at
ensuring its integrity;
d. review and monitor the independence of the statutory auditors or the audit firms in
accordance with Articles 22, 22a, 22b, 24a and 24b of Directive 2006/43/EU and
Article 6 of Regulation (EU) No 537/201427, and in particular the appropriateness of
the provision of non-audit services to the audited institution in accordance with
Article 5 of that regulation;
e. monitor the statutory audit of the annual and consolidated financial statements, in
particular its performance, taking into account any findings and conclusions by the
competent authority pursuant to Article 26(6) of Regulation (EU) No 537/2014;
f. be responsible for the procedure for the selection of external statutory auditor(s) or
audit firm(s) and recommend for approval by the institution’s competent body their
appointment (in accordance with Article 16 of Regulation (EU) No 537/2014 except
when Article 16(8) of Regulation (EU) No 537/2014 is applied), compensation and
dismissal;
g. review the audit scope and frequency of the statutory audit of annual or consolidated
accounts;
h. in accordance with Article 39(6)(a) of Directive 2006/43/EU, inform the administrative
or supervisory body of the audited entity of the outcome of the statutory audit and
explain how the statutory audit contributed to the integrity of financial reporting and
what the role of the audit committee was in that process; and
i. receive and take into account audit reports.
5.6 Combined committees
65. In accordance with Article 76(3) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities may allow
institutions that are not considered significant to combine the risk committee with, where
established, the audit committee as referred to in Article 39 of Directive 2006/43/EC.
66. Where risk and nomination committees are established in non-significant institutions, they may combine the committees. If they do so, those institutions should document the reasons why
they have chosen to combine the committees and how the approach achieve s the objectives
of the committees.
67. Institutions should at all times ensure that the members of a combined committee possess,
individually and collectively, the necessary knowledge, skills and expertise to fully understand
the duties to be performed by the combined committee28
6.1 Organisational framework
68. The management body of an institution should ensure a suitable and transparent
organisational and operational structure for that institution and should have a written
description of it. The structure should promote and demonstrate the effective and prudent
management of an institution at individual, sub-consolidated and consolidated levels. The
management body should ensure that the internal control functions are independent of the
business lines they control, including that there is an adequate segregation of duties, and that
they have the appropriate financial and human resources as well as powers to effectively
perform their role. The reporting lines and the allocation of responsibilities, in particular among key function holders, within an institution should be clear, well-defined, coherent, enforceable and duly documented. The documentation should be updated as appropriate.
69. The structure of the institution should not impede the ability of the management body to
oversee and manage effectively the risks the institution or the group faces or the ability of the competent authority to effectively supervise the institution.
70. The management body should assess whether and how material changes to the group’s
structure (e.g. setting up of new subsidiaries, mergers and acquisitions, selling or winding-up
parts of the group, or external developments) impact the soundness of the institution’s
organisational framework. Where weaknesses are identified, the management body should
make any necessary adjustments swiftly.
6.2 Know your structure
71. The management body should fully know and understand the legal, organisational and
operational structure of the institution (‘know your structure’) and ensure that it is in line with its approved business and risk strategy and risk appetite and covered by its risk management framework.
72. The management body should be responsible for the approval of sound strategies and policies
for the establishment of new structures. Where an institution creates many legal entities within
its group, their number and, in particular, the interconnections and transactions between them
should not pose challenges for the design of its internal governance, and for the effective
management and oversight of the risks of the group as a whole. The management body should
ensure that the structure of an institution and, where applicable, the structures within a group, taking into account the criteria specified in Section 7, are clear, efficient and transparent to the institution’s staff, shareholders and other stakeholders and to the competent authority.
73. The management body should guide the institution’s structure, its evolution and its limitations
and should ensure that the structure is justified and efficient and does not involve undue or
inappropriate complexity.
74. The management body of a consolidating institution should understand not only the legal,
organisational and operational structure of the group but also the purpose and activities of its
different entities and the links and relationships among them. This includes understanding
group-specific operational risks and intra-group exposures as well as how the group's funding,
capital, liquidity and risk profiles could be affected under normal and adverse circumstances.
The management body should ensure that the institution is able to produce information on the
group in a timely manner, regarding the type, the characteristics, the organisational chart, the
ownership structure and the businesses of each legal entity, and that the institutions within the group comply with all supervisory reporting requirements on an individual, sub-consolidated
and consolidated basis.
75. The management body of a consolidating institution should ensure that the different group
entities (including the consolidating institution itself) receive enough information to get a clear perception of the general objectives, strategies and risk profile of the group and how the group entity concerned is embedded in the group’s structure and operational functioning. Such
information and revisions thereof should be documented and made available to the relevant
functions concerned, including the management body, business lines and internal control
functions. The members of the management body of a consolidating institution should keep
themselves informed about the risks the group’s structure causes, taking into account the
criteria specified in Section 7 of the guidelines. This includes receiving:
a. information on major risk drivers;
b. regular reports assessing the institution’s overall structure and evaluating the
compliance of individual entities’ activities with the approved group-wide strategy;
and
c. regular reports on topics where the regulatory framework requires compliance at
individual, sub-consolidated and consolidated levels.
6.3 Complex structures and non-standard or non-transparent activities
76. Institutions should avoid setting up complex and potentially non-transparent structures.
Institutions should take into account in their decision-making the results of a risk assessment
performed to identify whether such structures could be used for a purpose connected with
money laundering, terrorist financing or other financial crimes and the respective controls and
legal framework in place29. To this end, institutions should take into account at least:
a. the extent to which the jurisdiction in which the structure will be set up complies
effectively with EU and international standards on tax transparency, anti-money
laundering and countering the financing of terrorism30;
b. the extent to which the structure serves an obvious economic and lawful purpose;
c. the extent to which the structure could be used to hide the identity of the ultimate
beneficial owner;
d. the extent to which the customer’s request that leads to the possible setting up of a
structure gives rise to concern;
e. whether the structure might impede appropriate oversight by the institution’s
management body or the institution’s ability to manage the related risk; and
f. whether the structure poses obstacles to effective supervision by competent
authorities.
77. In any case, institutions should not set up opaque or unnecessarily complex structures which
have no clear economic rationale or legal purpose or structures that could raise concerns that
these might be created for a purpose connected with financial crime.
78. When setting up such structures, the management body should understand them and their
purpose and the particular risks associated with them and ensure that the internal control
functions are appropriately involved. Such structures should be approved and maintained only
when their purpose has been clearly defined and understood, and when the management body
is satisfied that all material risks, including reputational risks, have been identified, that all risks can be managed effectively and appropriately reported, and that effective oversight has been ensured. The more complex and opaque the organisational and operational structure, and the greater the risks, the more intensive the oversight of the structure should be.
79. Institutions should document their decisions and be able to justify their decisions to competent authorities.
80. The management body should ensure that appropriate actions are taken to avoid or mitigate
the risks of activities within such structures. This includes ensuring that:
a. the institution has in place adequate policies and procedures and documented
processes (e.g. applicable limits, information flows) for the consideration, compliance,
approval and risk management of such activities, taking into account the
consequences for the group’s organisational and operational structure, its risk profile
and its reputational risk;
b. information concerning these activities and the risks thereof is accessible to the
consolidating institution and internal and external auditors and is reported to the
management body in its supervisory function and to the competent authority that
granted authorisation; and
c. the institution periodically assesses the continuing need to maintain such structures.
81. These structures and activities, including their compliance with legislation and professional
standards, should be subject to regular review by the internal audit function following a risk-
based approach.
82. Institutions should take the same risk management measures as for the institution’s own
business activities when they perform non-standard or non-transparent activities for clients
(e.g. helping clients to set up vehicles in offshore jurisdictions, developing complex structures, financing transactions for them or providing trustee services) that pose similar internal governance challenges and create significant operational and reputational risks. In particular, institutions should analyse the reason why a client wants to set up a particular structure.
7 Organisational framework in a group context
83. In accordance with Article 109(2) of Directive 2013/36/EU, parent undertakings and
subsidiaries subject to that directive should ensure that governance arrangements, processes
and mechanisms are consistent and well integrated on a consolidated or sub-consolidated
basis. To this end, parent undertakings and subsidiaries within the scope of prudential
consolidation should implement such arrangements, processes and mechanisms in their
subsidiaries not subject to Directive 2013/36/EU, including those established in third countries, including in offshore financial centres, to ensure robust governance arrangements on a consolidated and sub-consolidated basis. With regard to remuneration requirements some
exceptions in line with Article 109 (4) and (5) apply 31. Competent functions within the
consolidating institution and its subsidiaries should interact and exchange data and information
as appropriate. The governance arrangements, processes and mechanisms should ensure that
the consolidating institution has sufficient data and information and is able to assess the group-wide risk profile, as detailed in Section 6.2.
84. The management body of a subsidiary that is subject to Directive 2013/36/EU should adopt and
implement on the individual level the group-wide governance policies established at the
consolidated or sub-consolidated level, in a manner that complies with all specific requirements
under EU and national law.
85. At the consolidated and sub-consolidated levels, the consolidating institution should ensure
adherence to the group-wide governance policies and internal control framework as referred
to in Title V by all institutions and other entities within the scope of prudential consolidation,
including their subsidiaries not themselves subject to Directive 2013/36/EU. When
implementing governance policies, the consolidating institution should ensure that robust
governance arrangements are in place for each subsidiary and consider specific arrangements,
processes and mechanisms where business activities are organised not in separate legal entities
but within a matrix of business lines that encompasses multiple legal entities.
86. A consolidating institution should consider the interests of all its subsidiaries, and how
strategies and policies contribute to the interest of each subsidiary and the interest of the group as a whole over the long term.
87. Parent undertakings and their subsidiaries should ensure that the institutions and entities
within the group comply with all specific regulatory requirements in any relevant jurisdiction.
88. The consolidating institution should ensure that subsidiaries established in third countries, and which are included in the scope of prudential consolidation, have governance arrangements, processes and mechanisms in place that are consistent with group-wide governance policies and comply with the requirements of Articles 74 to 96 of Directive 2013/36/EU and these
guidelines, as long as this is not unlawful under the laws of the third country.
89. The governance requirements of Directive 2013/36/EU and provisions in these guidelines apply
to institutions independent of the fact that they may be subsidiaries of a parent undertaking in
a third country. Where an EU subsidiary of a parent undertaking in a third country is a
consolidating institution, the scope of prudential consolidation does not include the level of the parent undertaking located in a third country and other direct subsidiaries of that parent
undertaking. The consolidating institution should ensure that the group-wide governance
policy of the parent institution in a third country is taken into consideration within its own
governance policy insofar as this is not contrary to the requirements set out under relevant EU
law, including Directive 2013/36/EU and the further specifications in these guidelines.
90. When establishing policies and documenting governance arrangements, institutions should
take into account the aspects listed in Annex I to the guidelines. While policies and
documentation may be included in separate documents, institutions should consider
combining them or referring to them in a single governance framework document.
8 Outsourcing policy32
91. The management body should approve and regularly review and update the outsourcing policy
of an institution, ensuring that appropriate changes are implemented in a timely manner.
92. The outsourcing policy should consider the impact of outsourcing on an institution’s business and the risks it faces (such as operational risks, including legal and IT risks; reputational risks;
and concentration risks). The policy should include the reporting and monitoring arrangements
to be implemented from inception to the end of an outsourcing agreement (including drawing
up the business case for outsourcing, entering into an outsourcing contract, the
implementation of the contract to its expiry, contingency plans and exit strategies). An
institution remains fully responsible for all outsourced services and activities and management
decisions arising from them. Accordingly, the outsourcing policy should make it clear that
outsourcing does not relieve the institution of its regulatory obligations and its responsibilities to its customers.
93. The policy should state that outsourcing arrangements should not hinder effective on-site or
off-site supervision of the institution and should not contravene any supervisory restrictions on services and activities. The policy should also cover intragroup outsourcing (i.e. services
provided by a separate legal entity within an institution’s group) and take into account any
specific group circumstances.
Title IV – Risk culture and business conduct
9 Risk culture
94. A sound, diligent and consistent risk culture should be a key element of institutions’ effective risk management and should enable institutions to make sound and informed decisions.
95. Institutions should develop an integrated and institution-wide risk culture, based on a full
understanding and holistic view of the risks they face and how they are managed, taking into
account the institution’s risk appetite.
96. Institutions should develop a risk culture through policies, communication and staff training regarding the institutions’ activities, strategy and risk profile, and should adapt communication and staff training to take into account staff’s responsibilities regarding risk-taking and risk management.
97. Staff should be fully aware of their responsibilities relating to risk management. Risk
management should not be confined to risk specialists or internal control functions. Business
units, under the oversight of the management body, should be primarily responsible for managing risks on a day-to-day basis in line with the institution’s policies, procedures and
controls, taking into account the institution’s risk appetite and risk capacity.
98. A strong risk culture should include but is not necessarily limited to:
a. Tone from the top: the management body should be responsible for setting and
communicating the institution’s core values and expectations. The behaviour of its
members should reflect the values. Institutions’ management, including key function
holders, should contribute to the internal communication of core values and
expectations to staff. Staff should act in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations and promptly escalate observed non-compliance within or outside the
institution (e.g. to the competent authority through a whistleblowing process). The
management body should on an ongoing basis promote, monitor and assess the risk
culture of the institution; consider the impact of the risk culture on the financial
stability, risk profile and robust governance of the institution; and make changes
where necessary.
b. Accountability: relevant staff at all levels should know and understand the core values
of the institution and, to the extent necessary for their role, its risk appetite and risk
capacity. They should be capable of performing their roles and be aware that they will
be held accountable for their actions in relation to the institution’s risk-taking
behaviour.
c. Effective communication and challenge: a sound risk culture should promote an
environment of open communication and effective challenge in which decision-
making processes encourage a broad range of views, allow for testing of current
practices, stimulate a constructive critical attitude among staff, and promote an
environment of open and constructive engagement throughout the entire
organisation.
d. Incentives: appropriate incentives should play a key role in aligning risk-taking
behaviour with the institution’s risk profile and its long-term interest33.
10 Corporate values and code of conduct
99. The management body should develop, adopt, adhere to and promote high ethical and
professional standards, taking into account the specific needs and characteristics of the
institution, and should ensure the implementation of such standards (through a code of
conduct or similar instrument). It should also oversee adherence to these standards by staff.
Where applicable, the management body may adopt and implement the institution’s group-
wide standards or common standards released by associations or other relevant organisations.
100. Institutions should ensure that there is no discrimination of staff based on gender, race,
colour, ethnic or social origin, genetic features, language, religion or belief, political or any other opinion, membership of a national minority, property, birth, disability, age or sexual
orientation.
101. Institution’s policies should be gender neutral. This includes, but is not limited to
remuneration, recruitment policies, career development and succession plans, access to
training and ability to apply for internal vacancies. Institutions should ensure equal
opportunities34 for all staff independent of their genders, including with regard to career
perspectives and aim to improve the representation of the underrepresented gender in
positions within the management body as well as in the group of staff that have managerial
responsibilities as defined in the Commission’s Delegated Regulation (regulatory technical
standards (RTS) on identified staff).
35 Institutions should monitor the development of the
gender pay gap separately for identified staff (excluding members of the management body),
members of the management body in its management function, members of the management
body in the supervisory function and other staff. Institutions should have policies that facilitate the reintegration of staff after maternity, paternity or parental leave.
102. The implemented standards should aim at enhancing the institution’s robust governance
arrangements and reducing the risks to which the institution is exposed, in particular
operational and reputational risks, which can have a considerable adverse impact on an
institution’s profitability and sustainability through fines, litigation costs, restrictions imposed by competent authorities, other financial and criminal penalties, and the loss of brand value and consumer confidence.
103. The management body should have clear and documented policies for how these standards
should be met. These policies should:
a. remind staff that all the institution’s activities should be conducted in compliance with
the applicable law and with the institution’s corporate values;
b. promote risk awareness through a strong risk culture in line with Section 9 of the
guidelines, conveying the management body’s expectation that activities will not go
beyond the defined risk appetite and limits defined by the institution and the
respective responsibilities of staff;
c. set out principles on and provide examples of acceptable and unacceptable behaviours
linked in particular to financial misreporting and misconduct, economic and financial
crime including but not limited to fraud, money laundering and terrorist financing
(ML/TF), anti-trust practices, financial sanctions, bribery and corruption, market
manipulation, mis-selling and other violations of consumer protection laws, tax offences, whether committed directly or indirectly, including through unlawful or
banned dividend arbitrage schemes;
d. clarify that in addition to complying with legal and regulatory requirements and
internal policies, staff are expected to conduct themselves with honesty and integrity
and perform their duties with due skill, care and diligence; and
e. ensure that staff are aware of the potential internal and external disciplinary actions,
legal actions and sanctions that may follow misconduct and unacceptable behaviours.
104. Institutions should monitor compliance with such standards and ensure staff awareness,
e.g. by providing training. Institutions should define the function responsible for monitoring
compliance with and evaluating breaches of the code of conduct or similar instrument and a
process for dealing with issues of non-compliance. The results should periodically be reported
to the management body.
11 Conflict of interest policy at institutional level
105. The management body should be responsible for establishing, approving and overseeing
the implementation and maintenance of effective policies to identify, assess, manage and
mitigate or prevent actual and potential conflicts of interest at institutional level, e.g. as a result of the various activities and roles of the institution, of different institutions within the scope of
prudential consolidation or of different business lines or units within an institution, or with
regard to external stakeholders.
106. Institutions should take, within their organisational and administrative arrangements,
adequate measures to prevent conflicts of interest from adversely affecting the interests of its
clients.
107. Institutions’ measures to manage or, where appropriate, mitigate conflicts of interest
should be documented and include, inter alia:
a. an appropriate segregation of duties, e.g. entrusting conflicting activities within the
processing of transactions or when providing services to different persons, or
entrusting supervisory and reporting responsibilities for conflicting activities to
different persons;
b. establishing information barriers, e.g. through the physical separation of certain
business lines or units.
108. The management body should be responsible for establishing, approving and overseeing
the implementation and maintenance of effective policies to identify, assess, manage and
mitigate or prevent actual and potential conflicts between the interests of the institution and
the private interests of staff, including members of the management body, which could
adversely influence the performance of their duties and responsibilities. A consolidating
institution should consider interests within a group-wide conflict of interest policy on a
consolidated or sub-consolidated basis.
109. The policy should aim at identifying conflicts of interest of staff, including the interests of their closest family members. Institutions should take into consideration that conflicts of interest may arise not only from present but also from past personal or professional relationships. Where conflicts of interest arise, institutions should assess their materiality and decide on and implement mitigating measures, as appropriate.
110. Regarding conflicts of interest that may result from past relationships, institutions should set an appropriate timeframe for which they want staff to report such conflicts of interest, on the basis that these may still have an impact on staff’s behaviour and participation in decision- making.
111. The policy should cover at least the following situations or relationships where conflicts of interest may arise:
a. economic interests (e.g. shares, other ownership rights and memberships, financial
holdings and other economic interests in commercial customers, intellectual property
rights, loans granted by the institution to a company owned by staff, membership in a
body or ownership of a body or entity with conflicting interests);
b. personal or professional relationships with the owners of qualifying holdings in the
institution;
c. personal or professional relationships with staff of the institution or entities included
within the scope of prudential consolidation (e.g. family relationships);
d. other employment and previous employment within the recent past (e.g. five years);
e. personal or professional relationships with relevant external stakeholders (e.g. being
associated with material suppliers, consultancies or other service providers); and
f. political influence or political relationships.
112. Notwithstanding the above, institutions should take into consideration that being a
shareholder of an institution or having private accounts or loans with or using other services of an institution should not lead to a situation where staff are considered to have a conflict of interest if they stay within an appropriate de minimis threshold.
113. The policy should set out the processes for reporting and communication to the function
responsible under the policy. Staff should have the duty to promptly disclose internally any
matter that may result, or has already resulted, in a conflict of interest.
114. The policy should differentiate between conflicts of interest that persist and need to be
managed permanently and conflicts of interest that occur unexpectedly with regard to a single
event (e.g. a transaction, the selection of service provider, etc.) and can usually be managed
with a one-off measure. In all circumstances, the interest of the institution should be central to the decisions taken.
115. The policy should set out procedures, measures, documentation elements and
responsibilities for the identification and prevention of conflicts of interest, for the assessment of their materiality and for taking mitigating measures. Such procedures, elements ,
responsibilities and measures should include:
a. entrusting conflicting activities or transactions to different persons;
b. preventing staff who are also active outside the institution from having inappropriate
influence within the institution regarding those other activities;
c. establishing the responsibility of the members of the management body to abstain
from voting on any matter where a member has or may have a conflict of interest or
where the member’s objectivity or ability to properly fulfil duties to the institution may
be otherwise compromised;
d. preventing members of the management body from holding directorships in
competing institutions, unless they are within institutions that belong to the same
institutional protection scheme, as referred to in Article 113(7) of Regulation (EU)
No 575/2013, credit institutions permanently affiliated to a central body, as referred
to in Article 10 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013, or institutions within the scope of
prudential consolidation.
116. The policy should specifically cover the risk of conflicts of interest at the level of the
management body and provide sufficient guidance on the identification and management of
conflicts of interest that may impede the ability of members of the management body to take
objective and impartial decisions that aim to fulfil the best interests of the institution.
Institutions should take into consideration that conflicts of interest can have an impact on the
independence of mind of members of the management body.
117. When mitigating identified conflicts of interests of members of the management body,
institutions should document the measures taken, including the reasoning on how those are
effective to ensure objective decision-making.
118. Actual or potential conflicts of interest that have been disclosed to the responsible function within the institution should be appropriately assessed and managed. If a conflict of interest of staff is identified, the institution should document the decision taken, in particular if the conflict of interest and the related risks have been accepted, and if it has been accepted, how this conflict of interest has been satisfactorily mitigated or remedied.
119. All actual and potential conflicts of interest at management body level, individually and
collectively, should be adequately documented, communicated to the management body, and
discussed, decided on and duly managed by the management body.
12.1 Conflict of interest policy in the context of loans and other
transactions with members of the management body and
their related parties
120. As part of their conflicts of interest policies for staff (Section 12) and the management of conflicts of interest of members of the management body as set out in Paragraph 117, the
management body should set out a framework for identifying and managing conflicts of
interest in the context of granting loans and entering into other transactions (e.g. factoring,
leasing, property transactions, etc.) with members of the management body and their related
parties.
121. Without prejudice to the national transposition of Directive 2013/36/EU38, institutions may
consider additional categories of related parties to whom they apply, in whole or in part, the ir conflicts of interest framework regarding loans and other transactions.
122. The conflicts of interest framework should ensure that decisions regarding the granting of
loans and entering into other transactions with members of the management body and their
related parties are taken objectively, without undue influence by conflicts of interests and are
as a general principle conducted at arm’s length.
123. The management body should set out the applicable decision-making processes for
granting loans to and entering into other transactions with members of the management body
and their related parties. This framework may provide for a differentiation between standard business transactions39 entered into in the ordinary course of business and concluded on
normal market terms and staff loans and transactions, which are concluded on conditions
available to all staff. Furthermore, the conflicts of interest framework and decision-making
process may differentiate between material and non-material loans and other transactions,
different types of loans and other transactions and the level of actual or potential conflicts of interest they may create.
124. As part of the conflicts of interest framework, the management body should set
appropriate thresholds (e.g. per product type, or depending on the conditions) above which
the loan or other transaction with a member of the management body or its related parties
always requires the approval by the management body. Decisions on material loans or other
material transactions with members of the management body that are not being concluded
under normal market terms, but on conditions available to all staff, should always be made by
the management body.
125. The member of the management body benefitting from such a material loan or other
material transaction or the member who is related to the counterparty, should not be involved
in the decision-making.
126. When deciding on a loan or other transaction with a member of the management body or
their related parties, before taking a decision, institutions should assess the risk to which the institution might be exposed due to the transaction.
127. Where loans are arranged as a line of credit (e.g. overdrafts), the initial decision and
amendments thereof should be documented. Any use of such agreed credit facilities within the
agreed limits should not be considered as a new decision on a loan to a member of the
management body or their related party. Where an amendment of a line of credit is material
in line with the institution’s policy, a new assessment and decision should be made.
128. To ensure compliance with their conflict of interest policies, institutions should ensure that all relevant internal control procedures fully apply to loans and to other transactions with members of the management body or their related parties and that an appropriate oversight
framework is in place at the level of the management body in its supervisory function.
12.2 Documentation of loans to members of the management
body and their related parties and additional information
129. For the purpose of Article 88(1) of Directive 2013/36/EU, institutions should document
data on loans40 to members of the management body and their related parties properly,
including at least:
a. the name of the debtor and their status (i.e. member of the management body or related
party) and regarding loans to a related party, the member of the management body to
whom the party is related and the nature of the relationship to the related party;
b. the type/nature of loan and the amount;
c. the terms and conditions applicable to the loan;
d. the date of approval of the loan;
e. the name of the individual or body and its composition taking the decision to approve the
loan and the applicable conditions;
f. the fact (yes/no) as to whether or not the loan has been granted at market conditions;
and
g. the fact (yes/no) as to whether or not the loan has been granted at conditions available
to all staff.
130. Institutions should ensure that the documentation of all loans to members of the
management body and their related parties is complete and updated and that the institution is
able to make available to competent authorities the complete documentation in an appropriate
format upon request without undue delay.
131. For a loan to a member of the management body or their related parties above an amount
of EUR 200 000, institutions should be able to provide to the competent authority upon request
the following additional information:
a. the percentage of the loan and the percentage of the sum of all outstanding
amounts of loans towards the same debtor compared to:
i. the sum of its Tier 1 capital and Tier 2 capital and
ii. common equity Tier-1 capital of the institution;
b. whether the loan is part of a large exposure41; and
c. the relative weight of the aggregated sum of all outstanding amounts of loans
towards the same debtor, calculated as a percentage by dividing the total
outstanding amount by the total amount of all outstanding loans to members of
the management body and their related parties.
13 Internal alert procedures
132. Institutions should put in place and maintain appropriate internal alert policies and
procedures for staff to report potential or actual breaches of regulatory or internal
requirements, including, but not limited to, those of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and national
provisions transposing Directive 2013/36/EU, or of internal governance arrangements, through
a specific, independent and autonomous channel. It should not be necessary for reporting staff
to have evidence of a breach; however, they should have a sufficient level of certainty that
provides sufficient reason to launch an investigation. Institutions should also implement
appropriate processes and procedures that ensure that they comply with their obligations
under the national implementation of Directive (EU) 2019/1937 of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 23 October 2019 on the protection of persons who report breaches of
Union law.
133. To avoid conflicts of interest, it should be possible for staff to report breaches outside
regular reporting lines (e.g. through the compliance function, the internal audit function or an
independent internal whistleblowing procedure). The alert procedures should ensure the
protection of the personal data of both the person who reports the breach and the natural
person who is allegedly responsible for the breach, in accordance with Regulation (EU)
2016/67942 (GDPR).
134. The alert procedures should be made available to all staff within an institution.
135. Information provided by staff through the alert procedures should, if appropriate, be made
available to the management body and other responsible functions defined within the internal
alert policy. Where required by the staff member reporting a breach, the information should
be provided to the management body and other responsible functions in an anonymised way.
Institutions may also provide for a whistleblowing process that allows information to be
submitted in an anonymised way.
136. Institutions should ensure that the person reporting the breach is appropriately protected
from any negative impact, e.g. retaliation, discrimination or other types of unfair treatment.
The institution should ensure that no person under the institution’s control engages in
victimisation of a person who has reported a breach and should take appropriate measures
against those responsible for any such victimisation.
137. Institutions should also protect persons who have been reported from any negative effects
in case the investigation finds no evidence that justifies taking measures against that person. If measures are taken, the institution should take them in a way that aims to protect the person
concerned from unintended negative effects that go beyond the objective of the measure
taken.
138. In particular, internal alert procedures should:
a. be documented (e.g. staff handbooks);
b. provide clear rules that ensure that information on the reporting and the reported
persons and the breach are treated confidentially, in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2016/679, unless disclosure is required under national law in the context of further
investigations or subsequent judicial proceedings;
c. protect staff who raise concerns from being victimised because they have disclosed
reportable breaches;
d. ensure that the potential or actual breaches raised are assessed and escalated,
including as appropriate to the relevant competent authority or law enforcement
agency;
e. ensure, where possible, that confirmation of receipt of information is provided to staff
who have raised potential or actual breaches;
f. ensure the tracking of the outcome of an investigation into a reported breach; and
g. ensure appropriate record keeping.
14 Reporting of breaches to competent authorities
139. Competent authorities should establish effective and reliable mechanisms to enable
institutions’ staff to report to competent authorities relevant potential or actual breaches of
regulatory requirements, including, but not limited to, those of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013
and national provisions transposing Directive 2013/36/EU. These mechanisms should include
at least:
a. specific procedures for the receipt of reports on breaches and follow-up, for instance
a dedicated whistleblowing department, unit or function;
b. appropriate protection as referred to in Section 13;
c. protection of the personal data of both the natural person who reports the breach and
the natural person who is allegedly responsible for the breach, in accordance with
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (GDPR); and
d. clear procedures as set out in Section 13.
140. Without prejudice to the possibility of reporting breaches through the competent
authorities’ mechanisms, competent authorities may encourage staff to first try and seek to
use their institutions’ internal alert procedures.
141. Institutions should develop and maintain a culture that encourages a positive attitude
towards risk control and compliance within the institution and a robust and comprehensive
internal control framework. Under this framework, institutions’ business lines should be
responsible for managing the risks they incur in conducting their activities and should have
controls in place that aim to ensure compliance with internal and external requirements. As
part of this framework, institutions should have internal control functions with appropriate and
sufficient authority, stature and access to the management body to fulfil their mission, and a
risk management framework.
142. The internal control framework of institutions should be adapted on an individual basis to
the specificity of its business, its complexity and the associated risks, taking into account the
group context. Institutions should organise the exchange of the necessary information in a
manner that ensures that each management body, business line and internal unit, including
each internal control function, is able to carry out its duties. This means, for example, a
necessary exchange of adequate information between the business lines and the compliance
function and the AML/CFT compliance function where it is a separate control function, at the
group level and between the heads of the internal control functions at the group level and the
management body of the institution.
143. Institutions should implement appropriate processes and procedures that ensure that they
comply with their obligations in the context of combating money laundering and terrorist
financing. Institutions should assess their exposure to the risk that they may be used for the
purpose of ML/TF and, where necessary, take mitigating measures to reduce those risks as well
as their operational and reputational risks linked to them. Institutions should take measures to
ensure that their staff is aware of such ML/TF risks and the impact that ML/TF has on the
institution and the integrity of the financial system.
144. The internal control framework should cover the whole organisation, including the
management body’s responsibilities and tasks, and the activities of all business lines and
internal units, including internal control functions, outsourced activities and distribution
channels.
145. The internal control framework of an institution should ensure:
a. effective and efficient operations;
b. prudent conduct of business;
c. adequate identification, measurement and mitigation of risks;
d. the reliability of financial and non-financial information reported both internally and
externally;
e. sound administrative and accounting procedures; and
f. compliance with laws, regulations, supervisory requirements and the institution’s
internal policies, processes, rules and decisions.
16 Implementing an internal control framework
146. The management body should be responsible for establishing and monitoring the adequacy
and effectiveness of the internal control framework, processes and mechanisms, and for
overseeing all business lines and internal units, including internal control functions (such as risk
management, compliance, AML/CFT compliance, where separate from the compliance
function, and internal audit functions). Institutions should establish, maintain and regularly
update adequate written internal control policies, mechanisms and procedures, which should
be approved by the management body.
147. An institution should have a clear, transparent and documented decision-making process
and a clear allocation of responsibilities and authority within its internal control framework,
including its business lines, internal units and internal control functions.
148. Institutions should communicate those policies, mechanisms and procedures to all staff
and every time material changes have been made.
149. When implementing the internal control framework, institutions should establish adequate
segregation of duties – e.g. entrusting conflicting activities within the processing of transactions
or when providing services to different persons, or entrusting supervisory and reporting
responsibilities for conflicting activities to different persons – and establish information
barriers, e.g. through the physical separation of certain departments.
150. The internal control functions should verify that the policies, mechanisms and procedures
set out in the internal control framework are correctly implemented in their respective areas
of competence.
151. Internal control functions should regularly submit to the management body written reports
on major identified deficiencies. These reports should include , for each new identified major
deficiency, the relevant risks involved, an impact assessment, recommendations and corrective
measures to be taken. The management body should follow up on the findings of the internal
control functions in a timely and effective manner and require adequate remedial actions. A
formal follow-up procedure on findings and corrective measures taken should be put in place.
152. As part of the overall internal control framework, institutions should have a holistic
institution-wide risk management framework extending across all its business lines and internal
units, including internal control functions, recognising fully the economic substance of all its
risk exposures. The risk management framework should enable the institution to make fully
informed decisions on risk-taking. The risk management framework should encompass on- and
off-balance-sheet risks as well as actual risks and future risks that the institution may be
exposed to. Risks should be evaluated from the bottom up and from the top down, within and
across business lines, using consistent terminology and compatible methodologies throughout
the institution and at consolidated or sub-consolidated level. All relevant risks should be
encompassed in the risk management framework with appropriate consideration of both
financial and non-financial risks, including credit, market, liquidity, concentration, operational,
IT, reputational, legal, conduct, compliance with AML/CTF and other financial crime, ESG, and
strategic risks.
153. An institution’s risk management framework should include policies, procedures, risk limits
and risk controls ensuring adequate, timely and continuous identification, measurement or
assessment, monitoring, management, mitigation and reporting of the risks at the business
line, institution and consolidated or sub-consolidated levels.
154. An institution’s risk management framework should provide specific guidance on the
implementation of its strategies. This guidance should, where appropriate, establish and
maintain internal limits consistent with the institution’s risk appetite and commensurate with
its sound operation, financial strength, capital base and strategic goals. An institution’s risk
profile should be kept within these established limits. The risk management framework should
ensure that, whenever breaches of risk limits occur, there is a defined process to escalate and
address them with an appropriate follow-up procedure.
155. The risk management framework should be subject to independent internal review, e.g.
performed by the internal audit function, and reassessed regularly against the institution’s risk appetite, taking into account information from the risk management function and, where
established, the risk committee. Factors that should be considered include internal and external
developments, including balance-sheet and revenue changes; any increase in the complexity of
the institution's business, risk profile or operating structure; geographic expansion; mergers
and acquisitions; and the introduction of new products or business lines.
156. When identifying and measuring or assessing risks, an institution should develop
appropriate methodologies including both forward-looking and backward-looking tools. The
methodologies should allow for the aggregation of risk exposures across business lines and
support the identification of risk concentrations. The tools should include the assessment of
the actual risk profile against the institution’s risk appetite, as well as the identification and assessment of potential and stressed risk exposures under a range of assumed adverse
circumstances against the institution’s risk capacity. The tools should provide information on
any adjustment to the risk profile that may be required. Institutions should make appropriately
conservative assumptions when building stressed scenarios.
157. Institutions should take into consideration that the results of quantitative assessment
methodologies, including stress testing, are highly dependent on the limitations and
assumptions of the models (including the severity and duration of the shock and the underlying
risks). For example, models showing very high returns on economic capital may result from a
weakness in the models (e.g. the exclusion of some relevant risks) rather than a superior
strategy or excellent execution of a strategy on the part of the institution. The determination
of the level of risk taken should not therefore be based only on quantitative information or
model outputs; it should also comprise a qualitative approach (including expert judgement and
critical analysis). Relevant macroeconomic environmental trends and data should be explicitly
addressed to identify their potential impact on exposures and portfolios.
158. The ultimate responsibility for risk assessment lies solely with the institution, which,
accordingly, should evaluate its risks critically and should not rely exclusively on external
assessments. For example, an institution should validate a purchased risk model and calibrate
it to its own individual circumstances to ensure that the model accurately and comprehensively
captures and analyses the risk.
159. Institutions should be fully aware of the limitations of models and metrics and use not only quantitative but also qualitative risk assessment tools (including expert judgement and critical analysis).
160. In addition to the institutions’ own assessments, institutions may use external risk
assessments (including external credit ratings or externally purchased risk models). Institutions
should be fully aware of the exact scope of such assessments and their limitations.
161. Regular and transparent reporting mechanisms should be established so that the
management body, its risk committee, where established, and all relevant units in an institution
are provided with reports in a timely, accurate, concise, understandable and meaningful
manner and can share relevant information about the identification, measurement or
assessment, monitoring and management of risks. The reporting framework should be well
defined and documented.
162. Effective communication and awareness regarding risks and the risk strategy is crucial for
the whole risk management process, including the review and decision-making processes, and
helps prevent decisions that may unknowingly increase risk. Effective risk reporting involves
sound internal consideration and communication of risk strategy and relevant risk data (e.g.
exposures and key risk indicators), both horizontally across the institution and up and down the
management chain.
163. An institution should have in place a well-documented new product approval policy (NPAP),
approved by the management body, that addresses the development of new markets, products
and services, and significant changes to existing ones, as well as exceptional transactions. The
policy should in addition encompass material changes to related processes (e.g. new
outsourcing arrangements) and systems (e.g. IT change processes). The NPAP should ensure
that approved products and changes are consistent with the risk strategy and risk appetite of
the institution and the corresponding limits of the institution, or that necessary revisions are
made.
164. Material changes or exceptional transactions may include mergers and acquisitions,
including the potential consequences of conducting insufficient due diligence that fails to
identify post-merger risks and liabilities; setting up structures (e.g. new subsidiaries or single-purpose vehicles; new products; changes to systems or the risk management framework or
procedures; and changes to the institution’s organisation.
165. An institution should have specific procedures for assessing compliance with these policies, taking into account the input of the risk management function. This should include a systematic prior assessment and documented opinion by the compliance function for new products or significant changes to existing products.
166. An institution’s NPAP should cover every consideration to be taken into account before
deciding to enter new markets, deal in new products, launch a new service , or make significant
changes to existing products or services. The NPAP should also include the definitions of ‘new
product/market/business’ and ‘significant changes’ to be used in the organisation and the
internal functions to be involved in the decision-making process.
167. The NPAP should set out the main issues to be addressed before a decision is made. These
should include regulatory compliance; accounting; pricing models; the impact on risk profile,
capital adequacy and profitability; the availability of adequate front, back and middle office
resources; and the availability of adequate internal tools and expertise to understand and
monitor the associated risks. Furthermore, to comply with obligations under Directive (EU)
2015/849, institutions should identify and assess the ML/TF risk associated with the new
product or business practice, and set out the measures to take to mitigate those risks. The
decision to launch a new activity should clearly state the business unit and individuals
responsible for it. A new activity should not be undertaken until adequate resources to
understand and manage the associated risks are available.
168. The risk management function and the compliance function should be involved in
approving new products or significant changes to existing products, processes and systems.
Their input should include a full and objective assessment of risks arising from new activities
under a variety of scenarios, of any potential shortcomings in the institution’s risk management
and internal control frameworks, and of the institution’s ability to manage any new risks
effectively. The risk management function should also have a clear overview of the roll-out of
new products (or significant changes to existing products, processes and systems) across
different business lines and portfolios, and the power to require that changes to existing
products go through the formal NPAP process.
19 Internal control functions
169. The internal control functions should include a risk management function (see Section 20),
a compliance function (see Section 21) and an internal audit function (see Section 22). The risk
management and compliance functions should be subject to review by the internal audit
function. The responsibilities of control functions also include to ensure compliance with
AML/CTF requirements.
170. The operational tasks of the internal control functions may be outsourced, taking into
account the proportionality criteria listed in Title I, to the consolidating institution or another entity within or outside of the group with the consent of the management bodies of the
institutions concerned. Even when internal control operational tasks are partially or fully
outsourced, the head of the internal control function concerned and the management body are
still responsible for these activities and for maintaining an internal control function within the institution.
171. Without prejudice to national law implementing Directive 2015/849/EU, institutions
should assign the responsibility for ensuring the institution’s compliance with the requirements
of that directive and the institution’s policies and procedures to a staff member (e.g. head of
compliance). Institutions may establish a separate AML/TF compliance function as an
independent control function.
44 The person responsible for AML/CTF should, where necessary,
be able to directly report to the management body in its management and its supervisory
function.
19.1 Heads of the internal control functions
172. Heads of internal control functions should be established at an adequate hierarchical level
that provides the head of the control function with the appropriate authority and stature
needed to fulfil his or her responsibilities. Notwithstanding the overall responsibility of the
management body, heads of internal control functions should be independent of the business
lines or units they control. To this end, the heads of the risk management, compliance and
internal audit functions should report and be directly accountable to the management body,
and their performance should be reviewed by the management body.
173. Where necessary, the heads of internal control functions should be able to have access and
report directly to the management body in its supervisory function to raise concerns and warn
the supervisory function, where appropriate, when specific developments affect or may affect
the institution. This should not prevent the heads of internal control functions from reporting
within the regular reporting lines as well.
174. Institutions should have documented processes in place to assign the position of the head
of an internal control function and for withdrawing his or her responsibilities. In any case, the heads of internal control functions should – and under Article 76(5) of Directive 2013/36/EU
the head of the risk management function must – not be removed without the prior approval
of the management body in its supervisory function. In significant institutions, competent
authorities should be promptly informed about the approval and the main reasons for the
removal of a head of an internal control function.
19.2 Independence of internal control functions
175. In order for the internal control functions to be regarded as independent, the following
conditions should be met:
a. their staff do not perform any operational tasks that fall within the scope of the
activities the internal control functions are intended to monitor and control;
b. they are organisationally separate from the activities they are assigned to monitor and
control;
c. notwithstanding the overall responsibility of members of the management body for
the institution, the head of an internal control function should not be subordinate to
a person who has responsibility for managing the activities the internal control
function monitors and controls; and
d. the remuneration of the internal control functions staff should not be linked to the
performance of the activities the internal control function monitors and controls, and
not otherwise likely to compromise their objectivity.
19.3 Combination of internal control functions
176. Taking into account the proportionality criteria set out in Title I, the risk management
function and compliance function may be combined. The internal audit function should not be
combined with another internal control function.
19.4 Resources of internal control functions
177. Internal control functions should have sufficient resources. They should have an adequate
number of qualified staff (both at parent level and at subsidiary level). Staff should remain
qualified on an ongoing basis and should receive training as necessary.
178. Internal control functions should have appropriate IT systems and support at their disposal, with access to the internal and external information necessary to meet their responsibilities. hey should have access to all necessary information regarding all business lines and relevant risk-bearing subsidiaries, in particular those that can potentially generate material risks for the institutions.
20 Risk management function
179. Institutions should establish a risk management function (RMF) covering the whole
institution. The RMF should have sufficient authority, stature and resources, taking into
account the proportionality criteria listed in Title I, to implement risk policies and the risk
management framework as set out in Section 17.
180. The RMF should have, where necessary, direct access to the management body in its
supervisory function and its committees, where established, including in particular the risk
committee.
181. The RMF should have access to all business lines and other internal units that have the
potential to generate risk, as well as to relevant subsidiaries and affiliates.
182. Staff within the RMF should possess sufficient knowledge, skills and experience in relation
to risk management techniques and procedures, and markets and products, and should have
access to regular training.
183. The RMF should be independent of the business lines and units whose risks it controls but
should not be prevented from interacting with them. Interaction between the operational
functions and the RMF should help to achieve the objective of all the institution’s staff bearing responsibility for managing risk.
184. The RMF should be a central organisational feature of the institution, structured so that it can implement risk policies and control the risk management framework. The RMF should play
a key role in ensuring that the institution has effective risk management processes in place. The RMF should be actively involved in all material risk management decisions.
185. Significant institutions may consider establishing dedicated RMFs for each material
business line. However, there should be a central RMF, including a group RMF in the
consolidating institution, to deliver an institution- and group-wide holistic view on all risks and to ensure that the risk strategy is complied with.
186. The RMF should provide relevant independent information, analyses and expert judgement
on risk exposures, and advice on proposals and risk decisions made by business lines or internal
units, and should inform the management body as to whether they are consistent with the
institution’s risk strategy and risk appetite. The RMF may recommend improvements to the risk
management framework and corrective measures to remedy breaches of risk policies,
procedures and limits.
20.1 RMF’s role in risk strategy and decisions
187. The RMF should be actively involved at an early stage in elaborating the institution’s risk
strategy and in ensuring that the institution has effective risk management processes in place.
The RMF should provide the management body with all relevant risk-related information to
enable it to set the institution’s risk appetite level. The RMF should assess the robustness and
sustainability of the risk strategy and appetite. It should ensure that the risk appetite is
appropriately translated into specific risk limits. The RMF should also assess the risk strategies
and risk appetite of business units, including targets proposed by the business units, and should be involved before a decision is made by the management body concerning the risk strategies and risk appetite. Targets should be plausible and consistent with the institution’s risk strategy.
188. The RMF’s involvement in decision-making processes should ensure that risk
considerations are taken into account appropriately. However, accountability for the decisions
taken should remain with the business and internal units, and ultimately the management
body.
20.2 RMF’s role in material changes
189. In line with Section 18, before decisions on material changes or exceptional transactions
are taken, the RMF should be involved in the evaluation of the impact of such changes and
exceptional transactions on the institution’s and group’s overall risk, and should report its
findings directly to the management body before a decision is taken.
190. The RMF should evaluate how risks identified could affect the institution’s or group’s ability to manage its risk profile, its liquidity and its sound capital base under normal and adverse circumstances.
20.3 RMF’s role in identifying, measuring, assessing,
managing, mitigating, monitoring and reporting risks
191. The RMF should ensure that there is an appropriate risk management framework and that
all risks are identified, assessed, measured, monitored, managed and properly reported on by
the relevant units in the institution.
192. The RMF should ensure that identification and assessment are not based only on
quantitative information or model outputs, but also take into account qualitative approaches.
The RMF should keep the management body informed of the assumptions used in and potential
shortcomings of the risk models and analysis.
193. The RMF should ensure that transactions with related parties are reviewed and that the
risks they pose for the institution are identified and adequately assessed.
194. The RMF should ensure that all identified risks are effectively monitored by the business
units.
195. The RMF should regularly monitor the actual risk profile of the institution and scrutinise it against the institution’s strategic goals and risk appetite to enable decision-making by the
management body in its management function and challenge by the management body in its
supervisory function.
196. The RMF should analyse trends and recognise new or emerging risks and risk increases
arising from changing circumstances and conditions. It should also regularly review actual risk
outcomes against previous estimates (i.e. back testing) to assess and improve the accuracy and
effectiveness of the risk management process.
197. The RMF should evaluate possible ways to mitigate risks. Reporting to the management
body should include proposed appropriate risk-mitigating actions.
20.4 RMF’s role in unapproved exposures
198. The RMF should independently assess breaches of risk appetite or limits (including
ascertaining the cause and undertaking a legal and economic analysis of the actual cost of
closing, reducing or hedging the exposure against the potential cost of keeping it) . The RMF
should inform the business units concerned and the management body, and recommend
possible remedies. The RMF should report directly to the management body in its supervisory
function when the breach is material, without prejudice for the RMF to report to other internal
functions and committees.
199. The RMF should play a key role in ensuring a decision on its recommendation is made at
the relevant level, complied with by the relevant business units and appropriately reported to
the management body and, where established, the risk committee.
20.5 Head of the risk management function
200. The head of the RMF should be responsible for providing comprehensive and
understandable information on risks and advising the management body, enabling this body to
understand the institution’s overall risk profile. The same applies to the head of the RMF of a
parent institution regarding the consolidated situation.
201. The head of the RMF should have sufficient expertise, independence and seniority to
challenge decisions that affect an institution’s exposure to risks. When the head of the RMF is
not a member of the management body, significant institutions should appoint an independent
head of the RMF who has no responsibilities for other functions and reports directly to the
management body. Where it is not proportionate to appoint a person who is dedicated only to
the role of head of the RMF, taking into account the principle of proportionality as set out in
Title I, this function can be combined with the head of the compliance function or can be
performed by another senior person, provided there is no conflict of interest between the
functions combined. In any case, this person should have sufficient authority, stature and
independence (e.g. head of legal).
202. The head of the RMF should be able to challenge decisions taken by the institution’s
management and its management body, and the grounds for objections should be formally
documented. If an institution wishes to grant the head of the RMF the right to veto decisions
(e.g. a credit or investment decision or the setting of a limit) made at levels below the
management body, it should specify the scope of such a veto right, the escalation or appeal
procedures, and how the management body will be involved.
203. Institutions should establish strengthened processes for the approval of decisions on which
the head of the RMF has expressed a negative view. The management body in its supervisory
function should be able to communicate directly with the head of the RMF on key risk issues,
including developments that may be inconsistent with the institution’s risk strategy and risk
appetite.
21 Compliance function
204. Institutions should establish a permanent and effective compliance function to manage
compliance risk, and should appoint a person to be responsible for this function across the
entire institution (the compliance officer or head of compliance).
205. Where it is not proportionate to appoint a person who is dedicated only to the role of head
of compliance, taking into account the principle of proportionality as set out in Title I, this
function can be combined with the head of the RMF or can be performed by another senior
person (e.g. head of legal), provided there is no conflict of interest between the functions
combined.
206. The compliance function, including the head of compliance, should be independent of the
business lines and internal units it controls and have sufficient authority, stature and resources.
Taking into account the proportionality criteria set out in Title I, this function may be assisted by the RMF or combined with the RMF or other appropriate functions, e.g. the legal division or human resources.
207. Staff within the compliance function should possess sufficient knowledge, skills and
experience in relation to compliance and relevant procedures, and should have access to
regular training.
208. The management body in its supervisory function should oversee the implementation of a
well-documented compliance policy, which should be communicated to all staff. Institutions
should set up a process to regularly assess changes in the law and regulations applicable to its
activities.
209. The compliance function should advise the management body on measures to be taken to
ensure compliance with applicable laws, rules, regulations and standards, and should assess
the possible impact of any changes in the legal or regulatory environment on the institution’s
activities and compliance framework.
210. The compliance function should ensure that compliance monitoring is carried out through
a structured and well-defined compliance monitoring programme and that the compliance
policy is observed. The compliance function should report to the management body and
communicate as appropriate with the RMF on the institution’s compliance risk and its
management. The compliance function and the RMF should cooperate and exchange
information as appropriate to perform their respective tasks. The findings of the compliance
function should be taken into account by the management body and the RMF in decision-
making processes.
211. In line with Section 18 of these guidelines, the compliance function should also verify, in
close cooperation with the RMF and the legal unit, that new products and new procedures
comply with the current legal framework and, where appropriate, with any known forthcoming
changes to legislation, regulations and supervisory requirements.
212. Institutions should take appropriate action against internal or external behaviour that could facilitate or enable fraud, ML/TF or other financial crime and breaches of discipline (e.g. breaches of internal procedures, breaches of limits).
213. Institutions should ensure that their subsidiaries and branches take steps to ensure that
their operations are compliant with local laws and regulations. If local laws and regulations
hamper the application of stricter procedures and compliance systems implemented by the
group, especially if they prevent the disclosure and exchange of necessary information between
entities within the group, subsidiaries and branches should inform the compliance officer or
the head of compliance of the consolidating institution.
214. Institutions should set up an independent and effective internal audit function (IAF), taking into account the proportionality criteria set out in Title I, and should appoint a person to be responsible for this function across the entire institution. The IAF should be independent and have sufficient authority, stature and resources. In particular, the institution should ensure that the qualification of the IAF’s staff members and the IAF’s resources, in particular its auditing tools and risk analysis methods, are adequate for the institution’s size and locations, and the nature, scale and complexity of the risks associated with the institution’s business model, activities, risk culture and risk appetite.
215. The IAF should be independent of the audited activities. Therefore, the IAF should not be
combined with other functions.
216. The IAF should, following a risk-based approach, independently review and provide
objective assurance of the compliance of all activities and units of an institution, including
outsourced activities, with the institution’s policies and procedures and with regulatory
requirements. Each entity within the group should fall within the scope of the IAF.
217. The IAF should not be involved in designing, selecting, establishing and implementing
specific internal control policies, mechanisms and procedures, and risk limits. However, this
should not prevent the management body in its management function from requesting input
from internal audit on matters related to risk, internal controls and compliance with applicable
rules.
218. The IAF should assess whether the institution’s internal control framework as set out in
Section 15 is both effective and efficient. In particular, the IAF should assess:
a. the appropriateness of the institution’s governance framework;
b. whether existing policies and procedures remain adequate and comply with legal and
regulatory requirements and with the risk strategy and risk appetite of the institution;
c. the compliance of the procedures with the applicable laws and regulations and with
decisions of the management body;
d. whether the procedures are correctly and effectively implemented (e.g. compliance of
transactions, the level of risk effectively incurred, etc.); and
e. the adequacy, quality and effectiveness of the controls performed and the reporting
done by the defence business units and the risk management and compliance
functions.
219. The IAF should verify, in particular, the integrity of the processes ensuring the reliability of
the institution’s methods and techniques, and the assumptions and sources of information
used in its internal models (e.g. risk modelling and accounting measurements). It should also
evaluate the quality and use of qualitative risk identification and assessment tools and the risk mitigation measures taken.
220. The IAF should have unfettered institution-wide access to all the records, documents,
information and buildings of the institution. This should include access to management
information systems and minutes of all committees and decision-making bodies.
221. The IAF should adhere to national and international professional standards. An example of
the professional standards referred to here is the standards established by the Institute of
Internal Auditors.
222. Internal audit work should be performed in accordance with an audit plan and a detailed
audit programme following a risk-based approach.
223. An internal audit plan should be drawn up at least once a year on the basis of the annual
internal audit control objectives. The internal audit plan should be approved by the
management body.
224. All audit recommendations should be subject to a formal follow-up procedure by the
appropriate levels of management to ensure and report on their effective and timely resolution.
225. Institutions should establish a sound business continuity management and recovery plan
to ensure their ability to operate on an ongoing basis and to limit losses in the event of severe business disruption. 226. Institutions may establish a specific independent business continuity function, e.g. as part of the RMF47.
227. An institution’s business relies on several critical resources (e.g. IT systems, including cloud services, communication systems, core staff and buildings). The purpose of business continuity management is to reduce the operational, financial, legal, reputational and other material consequences arising from a disaster or extended interruption to these resources and
consequent disruption to the institution’s ordinary business procedures. Other risk
management measures might be intended to reduce the probability of such incidents or to
transfer their financial impact to third parties (e.g. through insurance).
228. In order to establish a sound business continuity management plan, an institution should
carefully analyse risk factors for and its exposure to severe business disruptions and assess
(quantitatively and qualitatively) their potential impact, using internal and/or external data and scenario analysis. This analysis should cover all business lines and internal units, including the RMF, and should take into account their interdependency. The results of the analysis should contribute to defining the institution’s recovery priorities and objectives.
229. On the basis of the abovementioned analysis, an institution should put in place:
a. contingency and business continuity plans to ensure that the institution reacts
appropriately to emergencies and is able to maintain its most important business
activities if there is disruption to its ordinary business procedures; and FINAL REPORT ON
b. recovery plans for critical resources to enable the institution to return to ordinary
business procedures in an appropriate timeframe. Any residual risk from potential
business disruptions should be consistent with the institution’s risk appetite.
230. Contingency, business continuity and recovery plans should be documente d and carefully
implemented. The documentation should be available within the business lines, internal units
and RMF, and should be stored on systems that are physically separated and readily accessible
in case of contingency. Appropriate training should be provided. Plans should be regularly
tested and updated. Any challenges or failures occurring in the tests should be documented
and analysed, with the plans reviewed accordingly.
Title VII – Transparency
231. Strategies, policies and procedures should be communicated to all relevant staff
throughout an institution. An institution’s staff should understand and adhere to policies and
procedures pertaining to their duties and responsibilities.
232. Accordingly, the management body should inform and update the relevant staff about the
institution’s strategies and policies in a clear and consistent way, at least to the level needed to carry out their particular duties. This may be done through written guidelines, manuals or other means.
233. Where parent undertakings are required by competent authorities under Article 106(2) of
Directive 2013/36/EU to publish annually a description of their legal structure and governance
and the organisational structure of the group of institutions, the information should include all entities within the group structure as defined in Directive 2013/34/EU48 , by country.
234. The publication should include at least:
a. an overview of the internal organisation of the institutions and the group structure as
defined in Directive 2013/34/EU and changes thereto, including the main reporting
lines and responsibilities;
b. any material changes since the previous publication and the date of the material
change;
c. new legal, governance or organisational structures;
d. information on the structure, organisation and members of the management body,
including the number of its members and the number of those qualified as independent, and specifying the gender and duration of the mandate of each member
of the management body;
e. the key responsibilities of the management body;
f. a list of the committees of the management body in its supervisory function and their
composition;
g. an overview of the conflict of interest policy applicable to the institution and to the
management body;
h. an overview of the internal control framework; and
i. an overview of the business continuity management framework.